Part I 


THE EPITOMES 



1 


Being Sympathetic to Officers 
(Qin Shi ) 1 


1.1 To take control of a state and not be sympathetic 
towards its officers leads to loss of the state. To see 
someone who is worthy and not be anxious [to use him] 
leads to neglect of its ruler. If someone is not worthy, don’t 
be anxious [to use him]. If someone is not an officer, don’t 
plan affairs of the state [with him]. There has never been 
anyone who disregarded worthiness and neglected officers 
but was still able to preserve his state. 

1.2 In earlier times, Duke Wen had to flee, and yet he came 
to govern the world. Duke Huan was forced to leave his 
state, and yet he became hegemon over the feudal lords. 

The King of The, Gou Jian, met with humiliation at the 
hands of the King of Wu, and yet later he was held in awe 


by the worthy rulers of the central states . 2 These three men 
were all able to achieve success and fame in the world 
because they endured repression and great disgrace in their 
own states. It is best by far not to fail, but next best is to 
find in failure the way to success. This is called making 
proper use of the people. 

1.3 I have heard this said: ‘It isn’t that there is no peaceful 
place to dwell; it is that my heart is not at peace. It isn’t that 
there is not enough wealth; it is that my heart is not 
enough.’ This is why the noble man is hard on himself but 
easy on others, whereas the ordinary man is easy on 
himself but hard on others. When a noble man takes office, 
he does not lose his ideals. When he goes into retirement, 
he considers the circumstances. Even if he is mistaken for 
an ordinary man, he never feels resentment because he has 
confidence in himself. This is why those who undertake 
what is difficult inevitably achieve what they desire. You 
never hear of those who do what they like avoiding what 
they dislike. For this reason, powerful officials harm the 
ruler and fawning subordinates damage their superiors. A 
ruler must have officials who will stand up to him. A 
superior must have subordinates who will be plain speaking. 
If those who engage in open debate adhere to their views 
and those who advise privately are bold in their censure, 


then the lives [of the people] can be prolonged and the state 
protected. If officials and subordinates attach importance 
to their rank and position and don’t speak out, if close 
advisers are silent and more distant officials sigh, if 
resentment builds up in the hearts of the people, if toadying 
and flattery are all around or if wise counsels are 
obstructed, the state is endangered. Did Jie and Zhou 3 not 
fail to make use of the world’s officers? Urey themselves 
were slain and they lost all under Heaven. Therefore, it is 
said that making a gift of the state’s treasures is not like 
recommending the worthy and promoting officers. 

1.4 Now if there are five awls, the sharpest is certainly the 
first to be broken. If there are five blades, the keenest is 
certainly the first to be dulled. In the same way, the 
sweetest well is the first to be exhausted and the tallest tree 
the first to be felled. [Likewise,] the efficacious tortoise is 
the first to be burned and the magical serpent the first to be 
dried in the sun. Thus, Bi Gan’s death was due to Iris 
opposition; Meng Ben’s death was due to his bravery; Xi 
Shi’s drowning was due to her beauty; and Wu Qi’s being 
torn asunder was due to his conduct of affairs . 4 These 
examples show that there are few whose deaths are not 
attributable to what distinguishes them. Thus it is said: ‘The 
more egregious one is, the more difficult it is to survive.’ 


1.5 Even a worthy ruler will not look kindly on an official 
without merit, and even a compassionate father will not 
look kindly on a son without promise. This is why a man 
who occupies a position for which he is not competent is 
not the man for that position. Likewise, a man who receives 
emolument for a rank he does not merit is not the man to 
have that emolument. Agood bow is hard to draw but it can 
reach the heights and penetrate the depths. Agood horse is 
hard to ride but it can bear a heavy load and travel far. Men 
of great talent are difficult to direct but they can serve the 
ruler and be respected. Great rivers do not resent the little 
streams that fill them because these streams are what can 
make them great. In affairs, the sage does not shirk his 
responsibility and does not go against things. Therefore, he 
can be a utensil of the world. Tims, the waters of a great 
river do not flow from one source, nor does a fur garment 
worth a thousand gold pieces come from the white fur of a 
single fox. How can a ruler not select those who follow an 
agreed course and select instead those who agree with him? 
This is not the way of an impartial king. 

1.6 Heaven and earth are not perpetually refulgent; great 
waters are not always turbulent; great fires are not 
continuously blazing; great virtue is not unfailingly lofty. 
The leader of a thousand [men], be he as straight as an 



arrow and as smooth as a whetstone, is not sufficient to 
cover the ten thousand tilings. This is wiry narrow streams 
quickly dry up, why shallow waters are quickly exhausted 
and why barren lands do not nourish. If a ruler’s genuine 
beneficence does not go beyond the confines of his palace, 
it cannot spread throughout the state . 5 


2 


Cultivating the Self 
(Xiu Shen) 


2.1 For a noble man, although there is strategy in warfare, it 
is courage that is fundamental; although there is ritual in 
mourning, it is grief that is fundamental. In being in office, 
although there is learning, it is right conduct that is 
fundamental. If the root is not secure, there is no way for 
the branches and leaves to flourish. If one does not cherish 
those who are near, one cannot induce those from afar to 
come. If one does not cherish one’s own family, one cannot 
devote oneself to outsiders. If one does not have an end and 
a beginning in the conduct of affairs, one cannot complete 
many undertakings. If one is obscure in raising something, 
one cannot be widely heard. This is why former kings, in 
bringing order to the world, certainly examined the near 
and solicited the distant. Anoble man is one who examines 



the near and cultivates the self. If he sees conduct that is 
not cultivated, or if he is vilified, he reflects on his own 
mistakes. In this way, resentment is minimized and [right] 
conduct is cultivated. If slanderous and vilifying words do 
not enter his ears, if critical and offensive sounds do not 
issue from his mouth, if he doesn’t harbour thoughts of 
killing and maiming in his heart, then even if there are 
people who would slander and accuse him, they would have 
nothing to rely on. 

2.2 Thus a noble man’s exertions daily grow stronger, his 
aspirations daily grow higher and his accomplishments 
daily grow more flourishing. Hie Way of the noble man is 
this: when poor to display honesty and when rich to display 
right action, to show love towards the living and to show 
pity towards the dead. These are four matters in which there 
is no place for him to be false; they are matters on which 
he must examine himself. What is stored in his heart is 
inexhaustible love. What is manifest in his behaviour is 
inexhaustible reverence. What comes forth from his mouth 
are words of inexhaustible refinement. If virtue extends to 
his four limbs, inheres in the flesh of his body and is not 
abandoned, even to the extreme of age, he is indeed a sage. 



2.3 In one whose will is not strong, wisdom is not far- 
reaching. In one whose words are not trustworthy, conduct 
is not efficacious. One who has wealth but cannot share it 
with others is not worth befriending. One whose adherence 
to the Way is not genuine, whose view of things is narrow 
and not broad, whose discrimination between right and 
wrong is not perspicacious, is not worth having as a 
comrade. When the root is not secure, the branches are 
inevitably endangered. When there is bravery without 
cultivation, there is inevitably indolence. When the source 
is turbid, what flows is not clear. When conduct is not 
trustworthy, reputation is inevitably damaged. Reputation is 
not born out of nothing. Praise does not grow of its own 
accord. If merit is achieved, reputation follows. Reputation 
and praise cannot be empty and false. These are matters that 
should be looked at in oneself. 

2.4 One who devotes his attention to words but is tardy in 
conduct will certainly not be listened to, even though he 
argues well. One who expends a lot of energy but brags 
about his achievement will certainly not be chosen, even 
though he works hard. One who is wise discriminates in his 
mind, but does not complicate his words. Exert strength, 
but do not brag about achievement. In this way, reputation 
and praise spread through the world. In speaking, devote 



attention to wisdom and not to amount; devote attention to 
clear analysis and not to eloquence. Not to be wise and not 
to analyse clearly, but to be indolent in oneself is to take 
the opposite road. Goodness that is not paramount within 
the mind is not enduring. Conduct that is not debated within 
oneself is not established. Reputation cannot be treated 
lightly and still be achieved. Praise cannot be sought 
cunningly and still be established. A noble man must match 
his words with his deeds. Nobody who concentrates on 
seeking profit and carelessly disregards his reputation can 
ever be deemed an officer by the world. 



3 


Dyeing 
(,Suo Ran) 


3.1 Master Mo told how he sighed when he saw someone 
dyeing silk, and said: ‘When something is dyed by blue 
[dye], it becomes blue. When it is dyed by yellow [dye], it 
becomes yellow What [the dye] enters changes in that its 
colour changes. Five entries [of dye] create five [different] 
colours. Therefore, dyeing must be given careful attention.’ 

3.2 This doesn’t only apply to the dyeing of silk. States 
have ‘dyeing’ too. Shun was ‘dyed’ by Xu You and Bo Yang; 
Yu was ‘dyed’ by Gao Yao and Bo Yi; Tang was ‘dyed’ by Yi 
Yin and Zhong Hui; King Wu was ‘dyed’ by Tai Gong and 
the Duke of Zhou. What ‘dyed’ these four kings was fitting; 
therefore they ruled all under Heaven, they were 
established as Sons of Heaven (emperors) and their 
achievements and fame extended throughout Heaven and 


earth. When the topic of men illustrious in the world for 
ren (loving kindness and humane conduct) and yi (right 
action and justice) are brought up, these four kings are 
invariably spoken of. Jie of Xia was ‘dyed’ by Gan Xin and 
Tui Duo; Zhou of Yin was ‘dyed’ by Chong Hou and Wu Lai; 
King Li was ‘dyed’ by Duke Chang Fu of Li and Rong 
Yizhong; King You was ‘dyed’ by Duke Yi of Fu and Duke 
Gu of Cai. 1 What ‘dyed’ these four kings was not fitting; 
therefore their countries were destroyed, they themselves 
died and were despised throughout the world. When the 
topic of men reviled in the world for the absence of yi 
(right action, righteousness and justice) and for shameful 
conduct is brought up, these four kings are invariably 
mentioned. 

3.3 Huan of Qi was ‘dyed’ by Guan Zhong and Bao Shu; 

Wen of Jin was ‘dyed’ by Jiu Fan and Gao Yan; Zhuang of 
Chu was ‘dyed’ by Sunshu and Shenyin; Flelu of Wu was 
‘dyed’ by Wu Yun and Wen Yi; Gou Jian of Yue was ‘dyed’ 
by Fan Li and Zhong Dafu. What ‘dyed’ these five rulers 
was fitting; therefore they ruled over the feudal lords and 
their achievements and fame were handed down to later 
generations. Fan Jiyi was ‘dyed’ by Zhang Liushuo and 
Wang Sheng; Zhonghang Yin was ‘dyed’ by Jiqin and Gao 
Qiang; Fu Chai of Wu was ‘dyed’ by Wang Sunluo and Chief 


Minister Pi; Zhi Boyao was ‘dyed’ by Zhi Guo and Zhang 
Wu; Zhongshan Shang was ‘dyed’ by Wei Yi and Yan Chang; 
Kang of Song was ‘dyed’ by Tang Yang and Tian Buli. 2 What 
‘dyed’ these six rulers was not fitting; therefore their 
countries were destroyed and lost, they themselves were 
punished and disgraced, their ancestral temples were ruined 
and destroyed, their descendants were completely wiped 
out, their princes and ministers were set aside and 
scattered, and the people were dispersed and lost. When the 
topic of those in the world who were avaricious and cruel, 
troublesome and vexatious is brought up, these six rulers 
are invariably mentioned. 

3.4 What is it that rulers in general use to bring about 
peace? They act according to principle. And this acting 
according to principle stems from proper ‘dyeing’. 
Therefore, rulers who are skilled [in ruling] take great pains 
in selecting officials, but use a light touch in controlling 
them. Rulers who are without ability harm their bodies and 
waste their spirits; they have anxious hearts and troubled 
minds, their states are increasingly endangered and they 
themselves are increasingly humiliated. With these six 
rulers, it was not that they did not consider their states 
important and did not cherish their own persons, but that 
they did not know the essential elements [of ruling]. And 


they did not know these essential elements because what 
‘dyed’ them was not fitting. 

3.5 It is not only countries that have ‘dyeing’; it is officers 
too. [With the latter,] if their friends all love ren (love, 
kindness, humaneness and benevolence) and yi and are 
honest, cautious and law-abiding, then each day their 
families will prosper, each day they themselves will be at 
peace, and each day their names will be honoured. If they 
hold an official position, they abide by its principles. The 
associates of Duangan Mu, Qin Zi and Fu Yue were like 
this. If, on the other hand, their friends all love to brag, are 
impetuous and form cliques, then each day their 
households will decline, each day they themselves will be 
in danger, each day their reputations will deteriorate, and, if 
they hold an official position, they will neglect its 
principles. The associates of Zixi, Yi Ya and Shu Dao 3 were 
like this, hi the Odes it says: ‘One must choose what one is 
steeped in; one must pay close attention to what one is 
steeped in.’ 4 This is what has been said. 


4 


Standards and Rules 
(Fa Yi ) 


4.1 Master Mo said: ‘Those who work in the world cannot 
do so without standards and rules. Nobody has been able to 
accomplish anything without standards and rules. Even 
those officers who are generals and ministers all have 
standards. Even the hundred craftsmen in doing their work 
all have standards too. They make what is square with a 
square, make what is round with compasses, use a straight 
edge to establish what is straight, determine the horizontal 
with a water level and the vertical with a plumb line. 
Whether craftsmen are skilled or unskilled, they all take 
these five things as standards. Skilled craftsmen are able to 
comply with these standards naturally; unskilled craftsmen, 
even if they are unable to comply with them naturally, will 
still surpass themselves if they follow them in their work. 



Thus the hundred craftsmen all have standards as a basis for 
their work. Nowadays, the greatest [achievement] is to 
bring good order to the world and the next greatest is to 
bring good order to a large state, but to attempt these things 
without reliance on standards is to compare unfavourably 
with the hundred craftsmen in terms of wisdom.’ 

4.2 This being so, what can be taken as a standard for 
bringing about good order? Would it be fitting if everyone 
took their parents as the standard? There are many parents 
in the world, but only a few who are ren (loving, kind, 
humane and benevolent). If everyone took their parents as 
the standard, this would be a standard without ren. A 
standard without ren cannot be taken as a standard. Would it 
be fitting if everyone took their teachers as the standard? 
There are many teachers in the world, but only a few who 
are ren. If everyone took their teachers as the standard, this 
would be a standard without ren. A standard without ren 
cannot be taken as a standard. Would it be fitting if 
everyone took their rulers as a standard? There are many 
rulers in the world, but only a few who are ren. If everyone 
took their rulers as the standard, it would be a standard 
without ren. Astandard without ren cannot be taken as a 
standard. Therefore all three - parents, teachers and rulers 



- cannot be taken as standards for bringing about good 
order. 

4.3 This being so, what can be taken as a standard for 
bringing about good order? It is said that there is no 
standard like Heaven. Heaven is broad and unselfish in its 
actions, and acts generously without considering itself 
virtuous. Its brightness is long-lasting and does not decay. 
Therefore, the sage kings 1 made it their standard. If Heaven 
is taken as the standard, then all one’s actions must be 
measured against Heaven. What Heaven desires should be 
done; what it does not desire should not be done. This being 
so, what does Heaven desire? What does Heaven abhor? 
Undoubtedly what Heaven desires is for there to be mutual 
love and mutual benefit among people. What it does not 
desire is for there to be mutual hatred and mutual harm 
among people. How do we know that Heaven desires 
mutual love and mutual benefit among people and does not 
desire mutual hatred and mutual harm among people? We 
know because it is without partiality in loving and 
benefiting them. How do we know that Heaven is without 
partiality in loving and benefiting them? We know because 
it is without partiality in possessing and feeding them. 


4.4 Nowadays all the countries under Heaven, whether 
large or small, are Heaven’s countries. People, whether 
young or old, whether noble or base, are all Heaven’s 
subjects. This is wiry there are none who don’t provide 
fodder for their oxen and sheep, who don’t feed their dogs 
and pigs and who don’t meticulously prepare the vessels for 
the sacrificial wine and millet to honour the actions of 
Heaven. Is this not because Heaven is without partiality in 
possessing and feeding them? If Heaven possesses and 
feeds them without partiality, how can we say that it doesn’t 
want mutual love and mutual benefit among people? This is 
why I say that Heaven will certainly bring good fortune to 
those who love and benefit people and will certainly bring 
misfortune to those who hate and harm people. I also say 
that those who kill the innocent will meet with disaster. 
How can it be said that Heaven will bring misfortune to 
those who kill others? Because Heaven desires mutual love 
and mutual benefit among people and does not desire 
mutual hatred and mutual harm among people. 

4.5 In ancient times, the sage kings, Yu, Tang, Wen and Wu, 
loved the ordinary people of the world, leading them to 
venerate Heaven and serve ghosts; their benefiting people 
was very great. Therefore, Heaven brought them good 
fortune, established them as Sons of Heaven, and the feudal 



lords of the world all respected and served them. The 
tyrannical kings, Jie, Zhou, You and Li hated the ordinary 
people of the world indiscriminately, leading them to revile 
Heaven and insult ghosts; their harming of people was very 
great. Therefore, Heaven brought them misfortune, causing 
them to lose their states and households, and to be 
slaughtered and held in contempt in the world so that 
posterity continues to vilify them right to the present day. 
Therefore, those who were without goodness and so 
suffered misfortune were Jie, Zhou, You and Li. Those who 
loved and benefited people and so attained good fortune 
were Yu. Tang, Wen and Wu. So there are those who attain 
good fortune through loving and benefiting people, and 
there are also those who suffer misfortune through hating 
and harming people. 



5 


The Seven Misfortunes 
(Qi Huan ) 


5.1 Master Mo said: ‘Astate has seven misfortunes. What 
are these seven misfortunes? When the city walls and 
moats cannot be kept in good repair but palaces and 
dwellings are well maintained - this is the first misfortune. 
When enemy states approach the frontiers and 
neighbouring states don’t come to one’s aid - this is the 
second misfortune. When the strength of the people is 
exhausted beforehand in useless undertakings, but material 
rewards are given to those without ability, when the 
people’s strength is dissipated without result, but goods and 
valuables are wasted in entertaining guests - this is the 
third misfortune. When officers are concerned about 
safeguarding their salaries, when travelling scholars are 
fond of fraternizing, when the ruler frames laws to punish 



officials, and when officials fear punishment and do not 
dare to oppose him - this is the fourth misfortune. When 
the ruler considers himself to have the wisdom of a sage 
and doesn’t ask about affairs, when he regards himself as 
secure and strong and makes no preparations for defence, 
and when the four neighbouring states scheme and he 
doesn’t realize that he should take precautions - this is the 
fifth misfortune. When those who are trusted are not loyal 
and those who are loyal are not trusted - this is the sixth 
misfortune. When the stored and planted pulses and grains 
are not enough to provide food, when great officers are not 
adequate to carry out affairs, when rewards and gifts cannot 
bring happiness and when penalties and punishments cannot 
bring fear - this is the seventh misfortune. If the seven 
misfortunes exist in a state, there will surely be loss of that 
state. If there are the seven misfortunes in guarding a city, 
the state will be overthrown when an enemy comes. If the 
seven misfortunes prevail, a state will certainly meet with 
disaster. 

5.2 ‘In general, the five grains 1 are what the people rely on 
and what the ruler takes as his support. Therefore, if the 
people have nothing to rely on, the ruler has no means of 
support. If the people have no food, they cannot conduct 
their affairs. Thus food must be taken as fundamental, land 


must be worked and there must be moderation in use. When 
the five grains are all gathered, the five tastes are all 
offered to the ruler; when they are not all gathered, the five 
[tastes] are not all offered. When one of the grains is not 
harvested, it is spoken of as a dearth. When two of the 
grains are not harvested, it is spoken of as a scarcity. When 
three of the grains are not harvested, it is spoken of as a 
misfortune. When four of the grains are not harvested, it is 
spoken of as a failure. When five of the grains are not 
harvested, it is spoken of as a famine. In a year of dearth, 
officers from grand masters down should all suffer a 
reduction in salary of one part in five. In a year of scarcity, 
they should suffer a reduction of two parts in five. In a year 
of misfortune, they should suffer a reduction of three parts 
in five. In a year of failure, they should suffer a reduction 
of four parts in five. In a year of famine, they should have 
no salary at all, only an allowance of food. When 
misfortune occurs in a state, the ruler should reduce the 
food for the sacrificial vessels by three parts in five. Grand 
masters should do away with musical instruments. Ordinary 
officers should not enter the schools. The ruler’s 
ceremonial garments should not be renewed. Guests of the 
feudal lords and messengers from the four neighbouring 
states should have prepared food, but it should not be 
abundant. Six-horse teams should be reduced to two-horse 



teams. Paths should not be repaired, horses should not eat 
grain, and servants and concubines should not dress in silk, 
thus indicating the extreme degree of insufficiency. 

5.3 ‘Now if a mother who is carrying her child on her back 
while drawing water lets the child fall into the well, she will 
certainly follow and drag her child out. But if there is a 
disastrous year of famine, with people hungry and starving 
by the roadside, this is a much greater source of distress 
than dropping a child into a well. Can this not be 
recognized? Thus, if the seasons of the year are good, the 
people are ren (generous) as well as good. [Conversely,] if 
the seasons of the year are disastrous, the people are 
parsimonious as well as bad. Is the nature of people not 
constant in this respect? If there are few people who 
produce food, but many who eat, it is not a year of 
abundance. Therefore it is said that if materials are 
insufficient, attention should be directed to the seasons; if 
food is insufficient, attention should be directed to use. 

The people of ancient times used the seasons’ production 
for the creation of resources. With this as the firm 
foundation for their use of resources, they were sufficient. 
Even if earlier times had sage kings, how could they ensure 
that the five grains were always harvested and that droughts 
and floods did not occur? Nevertheless, there were no 



people who froze or starved. How was this so? They 
worked hard in accord with the seasons and were frugal in 
their own lives. So the Xia Documents states: “Yu had 
floods for seven years” while the Ym Documents states: 
‘Tang had drought for five years.” This shows they 
encountered disaster and famine to an extreme degree. 
Nevertheless, the people did not freeze or starve. How was 
this so? It was because the production of resources was 
substantial, but their use was moderate. 

5.4 ‘If granaries are not supplied with grain, it is impossible 
to deal with disaster and famine. If armouries are not 
supplied with weapons, even if there is yi (right action and 
justice), it is impossible to prepare troops against those 
who act wrongly and are unjust (not yi). If inner and outer 
walls are not completely maintained, it is impossible for a 
city to defend itself. If the mind is not prepared 
beforehand, it is impossible to respond to crises. An 
example is Qing Ji whose mind was not prepared for going 
away so he was unable to escape easily. Jie made no 
preparations against Tang and so was banished. Zhou made 
no preparations against Wu and so was killed. 2 Jie and Zhou 
were both ennobled as Sons of Heaven and were rich, 
possessing all under Heaven, yet both were brought to ruin 
by rulers of small (hundred li) states. 3 How was this so? 


They may have been rich and noble, but they were not 
prepared. Therefore, being prepared is important for a 
state. Food is a state’s treasure. Weapons are a state’s 
claws. Walls are a state’s means of defending itself. These 
three things are “instruments” of the state. 

5.5 ‘Therefore, I say that if [in a state] its great rewards are 
conferred on those without merit, if its storehouses and 
armouries are emptied in the preparation of carriages and 
horses and exotic garments and furs, if hardship is inflicted 
on servants and foot soldiers by building palaces and 
houses of fine appearance, if in death the inner and outer 
coffins are thick and the garments and furs are numerous, if 
in life towers and pavilions are built, if in death graves and 
tombs are maintained, the result is that the people suffer 
without and the storehouses and armouries are exhausted 
within. Those above are not satisfied with their pleasures 
and those below cannot endure their hardships. Therefore, 
the country suffers from bandits and enemies and so is 
damaged. The people experience calamity and famine and 
so perish. These are all faults due to not being prepared. 
Moreover, food is what sages value. Thus the Zhou 
Documents says: “If a state does not have food for three 
years, then it is no longer a state. If a household does not 
have food for three years, then the children are no longer 



its children.” This is what is meant by a state being 
prepared.’ 



6 


Eschewing Faults 
(Ci Guo ) 


6.1 Master Mo said: ‘In the times when the people of old 
did not yet know how to make dwellings, they lived near 
hills and mounds and in caves where the moisture and 
dampness beneath harmed them. Therefore, the sage kings 
created dwellings and houses. As to their method of 
building dwellings, they said that a house should be high 
enough to escape moisture and dampness, the external 
walls sufficient to withstand wind and cold, the roof 
sufficient to withstand snow, frost, rain and dew, and the 
internal walls high enough to maintain the proper 
separation of men and women. There should be careful 
attention to these requirements and nothing more, so that, 
in general, waste of materials and expenditure of strength 
that did not bring added benefit was avoided. People may 



labour in their regular employment and in maintaining their 
city walls, and yet not be harmed. Urey may have 
expenditure due to their regular levies and the collection of 
rents and taxes, and yet not be distressed. It is not these 
things that cause the people to suffer. Excessive demands 
are what cause suffering among the common people. That 
is why, when the sage kings made dwellings, they made 
them suitable for living in but not to be pleasing to the eye. 
When they made clothes, garments, belts and shoes, they 
made them suitable for the body but not to be strange and 
exotic. Thus, they were frugal in themselves and instructive 
to the people, so the people of the world could be provided 
for and brought to order, and could get enough materials to 
use. 

6.2 ‘Now in their making of palaces and dwellings, the 
rulers of the present time are different. They invariably 
make heavy tax demands on the common people, cruelly 
seizing their materials for clothing and food in order to 
make dwellings, towers and pavilions of intricate 
appearance, and to adorn them with green and yellow 
engravings. And in making their palaces and dwellings like 
this, their assistants will all imitate them. This is why their 
resources are insufficient to deal with calamity and famine, 
and to give relief to orphans and widows, so the state is 



poor and the people difficult to govern. If rulers really want 
the world to be well ordered and find its disorder 
abhorrent, it is proper that the palaces and dwellings they 
make cannot be other than moderate. 

6.3 ‘In the times when the people of old did not yet know 
howto make clothes and garments, they wore coverings of 
skins tied with grasses. In winter, these were not light and 
warm; in summer, they were not light and cool. The sage 
kings thought this did not accord with the people’s 
conditions, so they taught women to make silk and hemp, 
and to weave cotton and light silk to make clothes for the 
people. Their rules for making clothes and garments were 
as follows: in winter the inner garments should be of woven 
silk, enough to be light as well as warm, and in summer the 
inner garments should be of fine linen, enough to be light 
as well as cool. They were careful about this and went no 
further. Thus, the sages made clothes and garments that 
were comfortable for the body and in accord with stature - 
that was enough. Urey didn’t make clothes and garments to 
delight the senses and be looked at by fools. At that time, 
strong carts and fine horses were not regarded as valuable. 
Carvings and engravings, ornaments and adornments were 
not regarded as pleasurable. How so? It was because the 
leadership was as it was. How was it that every family had 



enough resources for clothing and food to deal with 
drought and flood, disaster and famine? It was by having 
conditions that enabled them to maintain themselves and 
not be affected by what was external. In this way, the people 
were frugal and easy to govern while the ruler was 
moderate in his use of resources and could easily provide 
[for them]. Storehouses and granaries were full enough to 
anticipate adverse circumstances. Weapons and armour 
were not in disrepair. Officers and people were not worn 
out. This was enough to subjugate recalcitrant states. 
Therefore, the work of the hegemonical king could be 
carried out in the world. 

6.4 ‘In their making of clothes and garments, the rulers of 
the present time are different from this. Urey all already 
have what is light and warm in winter and what is light and 
cool in summer, and yet they invariably make heavy tax 
demands on the ordinary people, cruelly seizing their 
materials for clothing and food to make elegant, 
embroidered, ornamented, coloured and beautiful clothes. 
Gold is used to make hooks, pearl and jade to make girdle 
ornaments, female artisans make patterns and colours and 
male artisans make carvings and engravings, all as clothes 
for the body. Such things cannot be said to increase warmth 
or coolness. They simply use up resources and exhaust 



strength, and all to no avail. Looked at from this viewpoint, 
they don’t make clothes and garments for the sake of their 
bodies, but to look good in all cases. As a result, the people 
will be dissolute, mean and difficult to rule and their rulers 
will be wasteful, extravagant and difficult to restrain. Now 
if wasteful and extravagant rulers are attempting to bring 
good order to dissolute and mean people, it is unreasonable 
to expect the state to be without disorder. If rulers really 
want the world to be well ordered and find its disorder 
abhorrent, it is proper that in making clothes and garments, 
they cannot be other than moderate. 

6.5 ‘In the times when the people of old did not yet know 
howto make drink or food, they ate simply and lived 
separately. Therefore, the sages gave instruction, teaching 
men to plough, cultivate and plant so as to provide enough 
food for the people to increase their spirits, fill what was 
empty, strengthen their bodies and satisfy their bellies - 
that was all. And so their use of resources was moderate 
and they themselves were frugal, the people were made 
rich, and the country was well ordered. Nowadays it is not 
like this. Heavy taxes are imposed on the ordinary people 
to provide fine food and delicacies, steamed and roasted 
fish and turtles. Great countries prepare hundreds of dishes 
and small countries prepare tens of dishes, spread out over 



a wide area (a square zhang ) so the eye cannot see them 
all, the hand cannot touch them all and the mouth cannot 
taste them all. In winter, these dishes will grow cold, and in 
summer, they will grow rancid. If the ruler prepares drink 
and food like this, his assistants will imitate him. As a 
result, the rich and noble will be wasteful and extravagant 
while orphans and widows will be cold and hungry. Even if 
there is the desire for no disorder, this cannot be achieved. 
If rulers really want the world to be well ordered and find 
its disorder abhorrent, it is proper that in preparing drink 
and food they cannot be other than moderate. 

6.6 ‘In the times when the people of old did not yet know 
how to make boats and carts, they could not transport heavy 
loads or reach distant roads. Therefore, the sage kings 
created boats and carts to facilitate the business of the 
people. These boats and carts were sturdy and solid, swift 
and convenient so they could carry heavy loads and travel 
far. Moreover, the use of resources in their making was 
small, but the benefit they brought was great, so the people 
were happy and benefited from them. There were no orders 
and decrees to spur them on, and yet they acted. Tire people 
were not worn out, and yet the ruler had enough for his use, 
so the people came back to him. Now in their making of 
boats and carts, the rulers of the present time are different. 



Having already made boats and carts that are sturdy and 
solid, swift and convenient, they invariably impose heavy 
taxes on the ordinary people in order to embellish the boats 
and carts, adorning the carts with decorative fabrics and the 
boats with carvings and engravings. Women put aside their 
spinning and weaving to prepare the decorative fabrics, 
therefore the people are cold. Men leave their ploughing 
and sowing to prepare the carvings and engravings, 
therefore the people are hungry. If the ruler makes boats 
and carts like this, then his assistants will imitate him. This 
will cause the people to be hungry and cold to an extreme 
degree. Hierefore, the people are deceitful and dishonest. 
And if deceit and dishonesty are rife, then penalties and 
punishments are severe and the country is in disorder. If 
rulers really want the world to be well ordered and find its 
disorder abhorrent, it is proper that in making boats and 
carts, they cannot be other than moderate. 

6.7 ‘Whatever turns and revolves between Heaven and 
earth, whatever is encompassed within the four seas, must 
have the nature bestowed by Heaven and the harmonious 
proportions of yin and yang. Even the greatest sage cannot 
change this. How do I know this is so? In what the sages 
transmitted with regard to Heaven and earth, they spoke of 
upper and lower, and with regard to the four seasons, they 


spoke of yin and yang. With regard to people’s feelings, 
they spoke of male and female, and with regard to birds and 
beasts, they spoke of male and female. Truly these were 
things bestowed by Heaven; even the former kings could 
not change this. Although the perfect sages of former 
generations certainly had wives and concubines, this did not 
harm their behaviour, so the people were without 
resentment. Within the palace there were not detained” 
women, so within the world there were not unmarried men. 
Within the palace there were not detained” women and 
without there were not unmarried men, so the people of the 
world were many. Now rulers of the present time, in their 
taking of wives and concubines, have several thousand 
detained” women in a large state and several hundred in a 
small state. This means that many men in the world are 
without wives and many of the women are ‘detained” and 
without husbands, so men and women lose the chance [to 
marry and have children]. Therefore, the people are few. If 
rulers really want the people to be many and abhor their 
being few, they cannot be other than moderate in their 
taking of wives and concubines. 

6.8 ‘In all these five things, the sage is restrained and 
moderate but the lesser man is unrestrained and 
immoderate. If there is restraint and moderation, there is 



prosperity. If there is lack of restraint and moderation, 
there is decay. So there must be moderation in these five 
things. When there is moderation in respect of men and 
women, Heaven and earth are in harmony. When there is 
moderation in respect of wind and rain, the five grains 
ripen. When there is moderation in respect of clothes and 
garments, skin and flesh are in harmony (i.e. the body will 
be comfortable).’ 



7 


Three Arguments 
{San Bian ) 


7.1 Cheng Fan 1 questioned Master Mo saying: 'You. sir, say 
that the sage kings did not make music. Yet in former 
times, when the feudal lords were weary of the affairs of 
government, they found rest in the music of bells and 
drums. When officers and high officials were weary of the 
affairs of government, they found rest in the music of pipes 
and strings. Farmers ploughed in spring, weeded in summer, 
harvested in autumn and stored in winter. They found rest in 
the music of jars and bowls. Nowyou say the sage kings did 
not make music. This is like a horse being yoked and never 
released, or a bow being drawn and never relaxed. Isn’t this 
something that those who have blood and breath (i.e. living 
beings) cannot control?’ 


7.2 Master Mo said: ‘In former times, Yao and Shun had 
thatched roofs. Nevertheless, they created rites and music. 
Tang banished Jie to the great ocean and established 
himself as king of all under Heaven. When his 
administration was successful and there were no major 
subsequent misfortunes, he continued the music of the 
former kings. He also created his own music which was 
called Hu, and he arranged the Jiu Zhao? King Wu 
overcame the Yin and killed Zhou, and so established 
himself as king of all under Heaven. When his 
administration was successful and there were no major 
subsequent misfortunes, he continued the music of former 
kings. He also created his own music, which was called 
Xiang. King Cheng of Zhou continued the music of former 
kings and also created his own music which was called Zou 
Yu. But King Cheng 3 of Zhou’s rule of all under Heaven was 
not like that of King Wu. King Wu’s rule of all under 
Heaven was not like that of Cheng Tang. 4 Cheng Tang’s rule 
of all under Heaven was not like that of Yao and Shun. Thus, 
as their music became increasingly elaborate, so the order 
they established increasingly diminished. From this it can 
be seen that music is not a means of bringing order to the 
world.’ 


7.3 Cheng Fan said: ‘You. sir, say that the sage kings were 
without music, but this indicates that there was already 
music, so how can you say the sage kings were without 
music?’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘The decrees of the sage kings were 
aimed at reducing excess. Eating is beneficial. Those who 
eat when they feel hunger are wise but those who eat when 
they don’t feel hunger are certainly not wise. Now the 
sages did have music, but very little, which is tantamount to 
not having it.’ 




Part II 


CORE DOCTRINES 



8 


Exalting Worthiness I 
(Shang Xian' Shang ) 


8.1 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘At the present time, kings, 
dukes and great officers who govern a state all wish that 
state to be rich, with a large population and a well-ordered 
administration. Nevertheless, they don’t get wealth but 
poverty, they don’t get a large population but a small one 
and they don’t get good order but disorder. Basically, then, 
they fail to get what they desire; instead they get what they 
detest. What is the reason for this?’ 

8.2 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘It is because kings, dukes 
and great officers who govern a state are unable to use 
“exalting worthiness” and “utilizing ability” in their 
governing. Thus, if a state has many officers who are 
worthy and good, its order will be substantial whereas, if 
officers who are worthy and good are few, its order will be 


slight. So the responsibility of great officers properly lies 
in increasing the number of worthy men and nothing more.’ 

8.3 [Someone] asked: ‘If this is so, what is the method of 
increasing the number of worthy men?’ 

Master Mo replied, saying: ‘Suppose you wish to 
increase the number of officers of the state who are skilled 
in archery and charioteering. You must enrich them, 
ennoble them, respect them and praise them. Then officers 
of the state who are skilled in archery and charioteering can 
be obtained in large numbers. How much more so does this 
apply to officers who are worthy and good - men whose 
virtue is substantial, men who are discriminating in 
discussion and well versed in principles. Such men are 
certainly treasures of the state and [worthy] assistants at the 
altars of soil and grain. But it is also necessary to enrich 
them, ennoble them, respect them and praise them. Then 
good officers of the state can be obtained in large numbers. 

8.4 ‘This is why, in ancient times, the sage kings who 
conducted government, said: “Those who are not yi (right 
acting, righteous and just), we shall not enrich. Those who 
are not yi, we shall not ennoble. Those who are not yi, we 
shall not be kin to. Those who are not yi, we shall not 
associate with.” When the rich and noble men of the state 



heard this, they all withdrew and pondered, saying: “At first, 
what we relied on were riches and nobility Now the ruler 
promotes those who are yi and doesn’t set aside the poor 
and lowly This being so, we cannot be other than yi.” When 
those who were relatives heard this, they also withdrew and 
pondered, saying: “At first, what we relied on was kinship. 
Now the ruler promotes those who are yi and doesn’t set 
aside those who are not relatives. This being so, we cannot 
be other than yi.” When those who were close associates 
heard this, they also withdrew and pondered, saying: “At 
first, what we relied on was close association. Now the 
ruler promotes those who are yi and doesn’t set aside those 
who are distant. This being so, we cannot be other than yi.” 
When those who were distant heard this, they also withdrew 
and pondered, saying: “At first, because we were distant, we 
had nothing to rely on. Now the ruler promotes those who 
are yi and doesn’t set aside those who are distant. This 
being so, we cannot be other than yi.” When distant and 
lowly officials of the outer regions, young nobles within 
the palace, the masses in the capital and the common 
people of the far-flung regions heard this, they all strove to 
become yi. What was the reason for this? I say that for 
superiors employing subordinates, there is only one 
standard; for subordinates serving superiors, there is only 
one path. It is like a rich man who builds a high wall 



surrounding his house. When the wall is complete, he takes 
care to make only one entry gate so, when a robber enters, 
the rich man can close the gate and pursue him, and the 
robber has no way out. Why is this so? It is because the 
man in the superior position secures the key point. 

8.5 ‘Therefore, the sage kings of ancient times, in 
conducting government, gave precedence to virtue and 
exalted worthiness. Although someone might be a farmer, 
craftsman or merchant, if he had ability, they promoted 
him, conferring on him high rank, giving him a generous 
salary, entrusting him with [important] matters and 
providing him with executive power. They said: “If his rank 
and position are not high, the people will not respect him. 
If his stipend and emolument are not generous, the people 
will not trust him. If his administration and decrees are not 
put into effect, the people will not fear him.” Putting 
forward these three things and conferring them on the 
worthy was not done for the sake of rewarding worthiness, 
but because they wanted their affairs dealt with 
successfully. At that particular time then, precedence was 
based on virtue, responsibility for affairs was based on 
official position, rewards were determined by meritorious 
accomplishment, and there was evaluation of achievement 
and distribution of emoluments accordingly. Therefore, 



they did not give officials a permanent high position and 
did not condemn ordinary people to lifelong lowliness. 
They advanced those with ability and demoted those 
without ability They promoted yi in public and avoided 
resentment in private. These are the kinds of things I am 
speaking of. 

8.6 ‘Thus, in ancient times, Yao brought forward Shun from 
the northern side of Fu Marsh, handed over the 
administration to him, and the world was at peace. Yu 
brought forward Yi from Ymfang, handed over the 
administration to him. and the Nine Regions were 
established. Tang brought forward Yi Yin from his work as a 
cook, handed over the administration to him, and his 
measures were successful. King Wen brought forward 
Hong Yio and Tai Dian from among their snares and nets, 
handed over the administration to them, and the western 
lands were subdued. 2 And so during those times, although 
officials enjoyed a generous stipend and a respected 
position, they were always reverent and fearful in their 
actions. [Likewise,] although the people were farmers, 
craftsmen and merchants, they always strove to encourage 
one another and value virtue. Therefore, [worthy] officers 
are the means of assisting [the ruler] in the business of 
government. If he acquires such officers, his plans will 


encounter no difficulties, he himself will not be burdened, 
his reputation will be established and his achievement will 
be complete. His glory will be made known and evil will 
not arise; this will be due to acquiring [such] officers.’ 

8.7 Hris is why Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘When times are 
good, worthy officers must be promoted. When times are 
not good, worthy officers must be promoted. If you wish to 
follow the Way of Yao, Shun, Yu and Tang, you cannot do 
otherwise than exalt worthiness. Indeed, exalting 
worthiness is the foundation of government.’ 



9 


Exalting Worthiness II 
(Shang Xian Zhong ) 


9.1 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘At the present time, kings, 
dukes and great officers who rule the people, direct the 
altars of soil and grain and bring order to their state, desire 
prolonged stability and avoidance of failure. Therefore, 
how can they not see that exalting worthiness is the 
foundation of government? How do I know that exalting 
worthiness is the foundation of government? I say it is 
from the fact that when those who are noble and wise 
govern those who are foolish and base, there is order, 
whereas when those who are foolish and base govern those 
who are noble and wise, there is disorder. This is howl 
know that exalting worthiness is the foundation of 
government. Therefore, the sage kings of old particularly 
followed exalting worthiness and employed utilizing 



ability; there were no factions with fathers and older 
brothers, no partiality towards the noble and rich and no 
favouritism towards those of fine appearance. Urey 
promoted those who were worthy and gave them high 
positions, enriching and ennobling them by making them 
officials and chiefs. Tlrey restrained and demoted those 
who were unworthy, impoverishing and debasing them by 
making them followers and servants. In this way, the people 
were all encouraged by their rewards and intimidated by 
their punishments, and followed each other in becoming 
worthy. In this way, the worthy were many and the unworthy 
were few. This was spoken of as exalting the worthy. 
Subsequently, the sage kings listened to their words, 
followed their actions, examined their capabilities and 
cautiously gave them office. This was called using the able. 
As a result, those who could be used to bring order to the 
state were used to bring order to the state, those who could 
be used as senior officials were used as senior officials and 
those who could be used to bring order to a district were 
used to bring order to a district. In general, then, those who 
were used to bring order to the state and administer 
regions, districts and villages were all worthy men of the 
state. 



9.2 ‘When worthy men bring order to a state, they rise 
early and retire late, attend to cases at law and administer 
the government. In this way, the state is well ordered and 
punishments and laws are correctly implemented. When 
worthy men are senior officials, they go to bed after dark 
and rise at dawn, collect the tax revenue from strategic 
passes, marketplaces, mountains and forests, and marshes 
and bridges to fill the official treasury. In this way, the 
official treasury is full and resources are not dissipated. 
When worthy men administer districts, they go out early 
and come back late, ploughing and harvesting, planting fruit 
trees and gathering pulses and grains. In this way, pulses and 
grains are abundant and the people have enough to eat. Thus, 
if the state is well ordered, punishments and laws are 
correctly implemented. If the storehouses are full, the ten 
thousand people are enriched. Above, the vessels of sweet 
wine and millet will be pure for the sacrifices to Heaven 
and ghosts. Externally (abroad), there will be hides and 
silks to exchange with the feudal lords on all four sides. 
Internally (at home), there will be food for the hungry and 
rest for the weary, and the wherewithal to nourish the ten 
thousand people and foster the worthy men of the world. 
For this reason, from above, Heaven and the ghosts will 
enrich them. Externally (abroad), the feudal lords will ally 
with them. Internally (at home), the ten thousand people 



will feel close to them and worthy men will return to them. 
In this way, in planning affairs there will be success, in 
conducting affairs there will be completion. Defence 
within the state will be secure and attacks outside the state 
will be strong. This was also the method used in former 
times by the sage kings of the Three Dynasties - Yao, Shun, 
Yu, Tang, Wen and Wu - in ruling all under Heaven and 
holding sway over the feudal lords. 

9.3 ‘When there are these methods, but not the knowledge 
of howto implement them, then affairs will still not be 
brought to completion. This is because it is necessary to 
establish tliree foundations. What do I mean by the “tliree 
foundations”? I say they are these: If rank and position are 
not high, the people will not be respectful; if stored 
resources and salary are not substantial, the people will not 
have trust; if administration and decrees are not decisive, 
the people will not be in awe. Hierefore, the ancient sage 
kings gave those who were worthy high rank and a 
substantial salary, made them responsible for affairs, and 
gave them effective executive power. Was this just to 
reward their officials? No, it was so their affairs were 
brought to completion. Hie Odes says: 

I tell you to have pity and sympathy. 

I exhort you to confer rank. 

Of those who can grasp what is hot, 



few do not use water to rinse their hands. ^ 

This says that rulers and feudal lords in ancient times could 
not do otherwise than be close to their successors and 
assistants. It is like grasping something hot and having 
water to rinse with so there will be relief for the hands. The 
sage kings of old thought only of finding worthy men and 
employing them, of conferring rank on them to ennoble 
them, of dividing up land to enfeoff them and of not tiring 
in doing these things throughout their lives. Worthy men 
thought only of finding an enlightened ruler and serving 
him, exhausting the strength of their four limbs in bearing 
the burden of the ruler’s affairs, and of not wearying in 
doing these things throughout their lives. If there was 
beauty and goodness, this belonged to the ruler. In this way, 
beauty and goodness lay with the ruler while resentment 
and ill-repute lay with the subordinates. Peace and 
happiness lay with the ruler while sorrow and grief lay with 
the officials. Therefore, the sage kings of ancient times 
conducted their affairs like this. 

9.4 ‘At the present time, kings, dukes and great officers 
also wish to imitate the ancients by exalting the worthy and 
utilizing the able in the conduct of government; they 
elevate them by conferring rank, but the salary doesn’t 
follow. When there is elevation of rank without a 


commensurate salary, the people lack trust. [Aworthy man 
would] say: “This is not a true regard for me; it is 
hypocritically making use of me.” How can people who are 
hypocritically made use of feel close to their superiors! 
Thus, the former kings said: “Those who covet political 
power are unable to delegate affairs to others. Those who 
place great value on wealth are unable to distribute 
emolument to others.” So, if affairs are not delegated and 
emoluments not distributed, I would ask how worthy men in 
the world will bring themselves to the side of a king, duke 
or great officer? If worthy men don’t come to the side of a 
king, duke or great officer, it is the unworthy who will be 
standing to the left and right of him. When the unworthy are 
standing to the left and right, what is praised will not accord 
with worthiness and what is reviled will not accord with 
wickedness. If kings, dukes and great officers follow this 
path in conducting the government of the state, rewards will 
certainly not match the worthiness and punishments will 
certainly not match the wickedness. If rewards don’t match 
the worthiness and punishments don’t match the 
wickedness, those who are worthy will not be encouraged 
and those who are wicked will not be stopped. If this is so, 
there will not be kindness and filial behaviour towards 
parents at home, and there will not be proper regard for 
those who are older and younger in districts and villages. 



There will not be moderation at home and there will not be 
restraint outside the home. Nor will there be the proper 
distinction between men and women. Those who are put in 
charge of the official treasury will plunder and steal from 
it, and those who are charged with defending the city will 
betray and forsake it. If the ruler suffers a calamity, they 
will not die with him. If he is forced to flee, they will not 
follow him. Those employed to decide cases at law will not 
be just. Those who distribute wealth will not do it equitably. 
Those who plan affairs will not be successful and those 
who carry out affairs will not bring them to completion. In 
defence at home, they will not be steadfast. In attack 
abroad, they will not be vigorous. Hie reason why even the 
cruel and tyrannical kings of the Three Dynasties of former 
times - Jie, Zhou, You and Li - lost their kingdoms and 
overturned the altars of soil and grain was precisely this. 
And why was this? It was because in all cases they had a 
clear understanding of small matters, but did not have a 
clear understanding of great matters. 

9.5 ‘At the present time, when kings, dukes and great 
officers want a garment they cannot make, they must avail 
themselves of a skilled tailor. When there is an ox or a ram 
they cannot slaughter, they must avail themselves of a 
skilled butcher. So from these two examples, kings, dukes 



and great officers must realize they should exalt worthiness 
and utilize ability in the conduct of government. And yet, 
when it comes to disorder in the state or danger to the 
altars of soil and grain, they don’t realize they should 
employ the able to bring about order. If there are relatives, 
they employ them. If there are those who are rich and noble 
without [good] reason or those who are of fine appearance, 
they employ them. But if those who are rich and noble 
without [good] reason or those who are of fine appearance 
were to be employed in government, surely they would not 
necessarily prove intelligent and wise? If such men are 
employed in the administration of the state, this is to 
employ those who are neither intelligent nor wise in 
administering the state, so the state’s disorder can be 
known in advance. Moreover, if kings, dukes and great 
officers have those whom they love for their appearance 
and employ them, this is certainly not discovering their 
intelligence and loving them for it. As a consequence, 
those who are not capable of administering a hundred 
people are given positions as officials over a thousand 
people. Those who are not capable of administering a 
thousand people are given positions as officials over ten 
thousand people. What is the reason for this? I say if they 
are given positions as officials with high rank and generous 
salary, the reason is that [the ruler] loves their appearance 



and so employs them. If a person who is unable to 
administer a thousand people is given a position as an 
official in charge of ten thousand people, this is ten times 
his capacity as an official. Now administrative matters arise 
each day and must be dealt with on that day. But a day 
doesn’t increase tenfold. Knowledge is needed to deal with 
them, but knowledge doesn’t increase tenfold. So if you 
give a man an official post requiring ten times his ability, 
he will deal with one part but neglect nine parts. Even if day 
and night were to be joined together for the execution of 
official business, it would still not be carried out. What is 
the reason for this? It is because kings, dukes and great 
officers do not clearly understand the use of exalting 
worthiness and utilizing ability in the conduct of 
government. But if exalting worthiness and utilizing ability 
are used in government, there is order, as I said before, 
whereas if worthiness is devalued in the conduct of 
government, there is disorder, as I have said. 

9.6 ‘If kings, dukes and great officers of the present time 
have a genuine desire to bring order to the state, and wish 
to care for and protect it and not lose it, how do they not 
recognize that exalting worthiness is the foundation of 
government? Moreover, it is not as if exalting worthiness 
as the foundation of government is something Master Mo 



alone speaks of. This was the way of sage kings. It was 
spoken of in the writing of former kings, the “Ju Nian”. Hie 
chronicles say: “Seek sage rulers and wise men in order to 
benefit and aid yourselves.” The “Oath of Tang” states: 
‘Then seek a great sage and join with him, using your 
strength and being of like mind, to bring order to the 
world.” 2 These statements show that the sage kings did not 
lose sight of exalting worthiness and utilizing ability in the 
conduct of government. That is, the sage kings of ancient 
times were able to give careful attention to exalting 
worthiness and utilizing ability in the conduct of 
government, not mixing these principles with other things, 
so all within the world obtained their benefit. 

9.7 ‘hi ancient times, Shun farmed on Li Shan, made 
pottery on the banks of the Yellow River and fished in Lei 
Marsh. Yao found him on the northern side of Fu Marsh and 
raised him to be the Son of Heaven, 3 handing over the 
government of the world and the administration of the 
world’s people to him. Yi Zhi (Yi Yin) was the personal 
servant of a woman from You Xin and was himself a cook. 
Tang found him and raised him to be chief minister, 4 
handing over the government of the world and the 
administration of the world’s people to him. Fu Yue, clad in 
coarse cloth bound with rope, was working as a common 


labourer at Fu Yan when Wu Ding found him and raised him 
to be one of the Three Dukes, 5 handing over the 
government of the world and the administration of the 
world’s people to him. How was it that someone who was at 
first a lowly servant was ennobled, who was at first a poor 
servant was enriched? It was because kings, dukes and great 
officers clearly understood the need to exalt worthiness 
and utilize ability in government. In this way, there were no 
instances of people who were hungry not getting food, or 
of people who were cold not getting clothing, or of people 
who were weary not getting rest, or of disorder that was not 
brought to order. 

9.8 ‘Therefore, the ancient sage kings gave careful 
attention to exalting worthiness and utilizing ability in the 
conduct of government, taking their model from Heaven. 
Heaven doesn’t discriminate between poor and rich, noble 
and base, those far removed and those near at hand, or close 
and distant relatives. Those who were worthy were put 
forward and advanced whereas those who were unworthy 
were held back and rejected. This being so, then who were 
those both rich and noble who became worthy and so 
obtained their reward? I say that the former sage kings of 
the Three Dynasties - Yao, Shun, Yu, Tang, Wen and Wu - 
were such men. And how did they obtain their rewards? I 


say that in their governing of the world, they were universal 
(without partiality) in their love for it, and followed up by 
benefiting it. Urey also led the ten thousand people of the 
world to revere Heaven and serve ghosts. That they loved 
and benefited the ten thousand people is why Heaven and 
ghosts honoured them, establishing them as Sons of 
Heaven and taking them to be the parents of the people. 

And it is wiry the ten thousand people served them and 
praised them, calling them “sage kings”, as they still do to 
the present day. This, then, is a case of the rich and noble 
being worthy and so obtaining their reward. Who were 
those who were rich and noble but were evil, and for this 
reason suffered their punishment? I say the former cruel 
kings of the Three Dynasties - Jie, Zhou, You and Li - were 
such men. How do I know this to be so? I say that in their 
governing of the world they were without discrimination in 
their hatred for it and followed by plundering it. They also 
led the people of the world to abuse Heaven and insult 
ghosts. They massacred the ten thousand people and for 
this reason Heaven and ghosts punished them, causing them 
to die and be desecrated, their sons and grandsons to be 
dispersed and scattered, and their houses and families to be 
damaged and destroyed. So they were cut off without 
descendants and the people went on to condemn them, 
calling them cruel and tyrannical kings, as they still do to 



the present day. This, then, is a case of those who were rich 
and noble being cruel and tyrannical and so getting their 
punishment. 

9.9 ‘This being so, then who were those who were closely 
related but bad and so suffered their punishment? I say that 
Bo Gun of former times was such a man; he was a direct 
descendant of the emperor, but had abandoned the 
emperor’s beneficent virtue and so was banished to the 
region of Yu where no warmth or light reached him and the 
emperor did not love him. 6 This was a case of someone 
being closely related but bad and so suffering his 
punishment. Who were examples of Heaven employing the 
able? I say that men of former times like Yu, Ji and Gao 
Yao 7 were such men. How do I know this to be so? In the 
writings of the former kings, the ‘Tunishments of Lii” has 
this to say: “The great emperor carefully questioned his 
subjects and there were complaints against the Miao 
people. 8 He said that the feudal lords and those below them 
must be men of obvious virtue not selected by convention, 
and widows and widowers who were worthy were not to be 
hidden from notice. Virtue is imposing only when it is truly 
imposing. Virtue is clear only when it is clearly manifest. 
Thus he ordered the three lords to be sympathetic but 
effective in relation to the people. Bo Yi established the 


statutes and restrained the people with punishments. Yu 
brought order to the waters and lands and gave names to the 
mountains and rivers. Ji came down [from his high 
position] to sow seed and to cultivate and propagate fine 
grain. The three lords completed their achievements and 
their contribution to the people was great.” This, then, is to 
say that the three sages were cautious in their speech, 
careful in their actions and meticulous in their planning, 
searching out the world’s hidden affairs and neglected 
benefits in order to serve Heaven above, so Heaven took 
delight in their virtue. Below, they bestowed [benefits] on 
the ten thousand people, so the ten thousand people 
received their benefits unceasingly throughout their lives. 

9.10 ‘Therefore, the words of the former kings said: “With 
respect to this Way, when it is used on a large scale, the 
world will not be defective. When it is used on a small 
scale, the world will not be in difficulty. When it is used 
over a long period, the ten thousand people will be 
benefited by it unceasingly throughout their lives.” The 
‘Hymns of Zhou” has this to say: “Tire virtue of the sage 
kings is as high as Heaven and as broad as the earth; it 
illuminates the world. It is as solid as the earth’s foundation 
and as the mountains’ support; it does not crack or collapse. 
It is as bright as the sun and as clear as the moon; it is as 



constant as Heaven and earth.” This, then, is what is said of 
the sage’s virtue: it is clear, bright, all-encompassing and 
vast; it is firmly rooted and long enduring. Thus the virtue 
of the sage spreads over all Heaven and earth. 

9.11 ‘At the present time, kings, dukes and great officers 
wish to rule all under Heaven and govern the feudal lords, 
but without de (virtue) and yi (right action, righteousness 
and justice), how will they do this? They say it would need 
to be through intimidation and force. But why would the 
kings, dukes and great officers of the present time choose 
intimidation and force? This would only incline the people 
towards death. Life is what the people most desire; death is 
what they most detest. And yet what they desire is not 
attained while what they detest frequently occurs. From 
ancient times to the present, there has never been anyone 
who has been able to use these methods to rule all under 
Heaven and govern the feudal lords. Now if kings and great 
officers wish to rule all under Heaven and govern the feudal 
lords, if they wish to realize their ambitions for the world 
and extend their reputation to later generations, why do 
they not look to exalting worthiness as the basis of 
government? This was the meritorious conduct of the 
sages.’ 


10 


Exalting Worthiness III 
(Shang Xian Xia) 


10.1 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘Kings, dukes and great 
officers of the world all desire their states to be rich, with 
a large population and a well-ordered administration. 
Nevertheless, they don’t realize they should use exalting 
worthiness in governing their state and people. That is, 
kings, dukes and great officers don’t know that exalting 
worthiness is the foundation of government. If kings, dukes 
and great officers don’t know that exalting worthiness is 
the foundation of government, can we do otherwise than put 
forward examples to show that it is? Now suppose there 
was a feudal lord involved in the administration of his state 
who said: “All those officers in my state who can shoot 
arrows and drive chariots, I shall reward and honour, but 
those who can’t shoot arrows and drive chariots, I shall 



censure and degrade.” You might ask, which officers of a 
state like this would be happy and which would be fearful? I 
think it would certainly be those officers who were able to 
shoot arrows and drive chariots who would be happy and 
those officers who were unable to shoot arrows and drive 
chariots who would be fearful. I might take this discussion 
a step further and have him say: “All the loyal and 
trustworthy officers of my state, I shall reward and honour, 
but those who are not loyal and trustworthy, I shall censure 
and degrade.” Y)u might ask, which officers of a state like 
this would be happy and which would be fearful? I think it 
would certainly be those officers who were loyal and 
trustworthy who would be happy and those officers who 
were not loyal and trustworthy who would be fearful. Now 
if he makes use of exalting worthiness in conducting the 
government of his state and its people, he will cause those 
of the state who do good to be encouraged and those who 
do evil to be stopped. If this is extended to use in 
conducting the government of the world, it causes those of 
the world who do good to be encouraged and those who do 
evil to be stopped. This being so, why did I previously 
regard as honourable the Way of Yao, Shun, Yu, Tang, Wen 
and Wu? It was because they were in touch with the masses 
in issuing their decrees and bringing order to the populace, 
which meant that those in the world who were good could 



be encouraged and those who were evil could be stopped. It 
is in such a manner that exalting worthiness is identical 
with the Way of Yao, Shun, Yu. Tang, Wen and Wu. 

10.2 ‘And yet, at the present time, officers and noble men 
of the world all exalt worthiness in their private speech, but 
when it comes to being in touch with the masses in issuing 
decrees and bringing order to the people, they don’t realize 
they should exalt worthiness and utilize ability. This is how 
I know that officers and noble men of the world are clear 
about small matters but not about great matters. How do I 
know this is so? Now if kings, dukes and great officers have 
an ox or a sheep they cannot slaughter, they must send for a 
skilled butcher. If they have the material for a garment they 
cannot make, they must send for a skilled tailor. When a 
king, duke or great officer is in such a situation, although 
there is a blood relative, or someone rich and noble without 
good reason, or someone of fine appearance, he would 
surely know they were not able and he would not use them. 
Why is this? He would be afraid they might damage the 
material. When a king, duke or great officer is in such a 
situation, he does not fail to exalt worthiness and utilize 
ability. If a king, duke or great officer has a sick horse that 
he cannot cure, he would certainly call for a skilled 
veterinarian. If he has an overly stiff bow that he cannot 



draw, he would certainly call for a skilled craftsman. When 
a king, duke or great officer is in such a situation, although 
there is a blood relation, or someone rich and noble 
without good reason, or someone of fine appearance, he 
would truly know they were not capable and he would not 
use them. What is the reason for this? He would be afraid 
they might damage the material. When a king, duke or great 
officer is in this situation, he does not fail to exalt 
worthiness and utilize ability. But when it comes to his 
state, he is not like this, in that if he has a blood relation, or 
someone rich and noble without cause, or someone of fine 
appearance, then he advances him. So his concern for Iris 
state is not like his concern for the matters of the overly 
stiff bow, the sick horse, the garment, or the ox or sheep. 
This is how I know that officers and noble men of the world 
are all clear about small matters, but are not clear about 
great matters. It is like taking those who are dumb and 
making them envoys, or taking those who are deaf and 
making them music masters. 

10.3 ‘For this reason, in the ancient sage kings’ governing 
of the world, those whom they enriched and ennobled were 
not necessarily the blood relatives of kings, dukes and great 
officers, or those who were rich and noble without good 
reason, or those of fine appearance. For example, in former 



times, Shun cultivated land on Li Shan, made pottery on the 
banks of the Yellow River and sold his wares at Changyang. 
Yao found him on the northern side of Fu Marsh and 
established him as the Son of Heaven, handing over the 
government of the world and the administration of the 
world’s people to him. In former times, Yi Yin was the 
personal servant of a daughter of the [You] Xin clan and was 
employed as a cook. Tang found him and raised him to be 
one of the Three Dukes, handing over the government of 
the world and the administration of the world’s people to 
him. Fu Yue of former times lived in the district of Beihai 
within the prison walls. His garments were of coarse cloth 
bound with rope and he was working as a common labourer 
in the city of Fu Yan. Wu Ding found him and raised him to 
be one of the Three Dukes, handing over the government of 
the world and the administration of the world’s people to 
him. Was the reason for Yao’s promotion of Shun, or Tang’s 
promotion of Yi Yin, or Wu Ding’s promotion of Fu Yue 
because they were blood relatives, or rich and noble 
without good reason, or of fine appearance? No, it was only 
because they modelled themselves on their words, used 
their plans and carried into practice their Way. Thus it was 
possible for them to benefit Heaven in the upper realm, to 
benefit ghosts in the middle realm and to benefit the people 



in the lower realm. This was why they brought them 
forward and elevated them. 

10.4 ‘The ancient sage kings gave careful attention to [the 
principle of] exalting worthiness and wished to use it in 
governing. Therefore, they wrote it on bamboo and silk, and 
carved it on ceremonial basins and bowls, in this way 
passing it on to their descendants of later generations. In 
the record of the former kings, the "Punishments of Lii”, it 
is written thus: ‘Tire king said: ‘All come, you who have 
states and lands, and I shall tell you of just punishments. If 
at present you are to bring peace to the ordinary people, 
whom should you select? Is it not worthy men? What 
should you respect? Is it not punishments? What should 
you reflect on? Is it not making the punishments fitting?’” 1 
If you are capable in selecting men and give reverent 
attention to the carrying out of punishments, the Way of 
Yao, Shun, Yu, Tang, Wen and Wu can be reached. How is 
this? It is through exalting worthiness that it is reached. In 
the writing of former kings, the Shu Nian , 2 it is written 
thus: “[They] say: look for sages, valiant and wise men, to 
guard and assist your person.” Hiis says that former kings, 
in governing the world, certainly chose worthy men to be 
their officers and assistants. I say that at the present time, 
officers and noble men of the world all wish for wealth and 


nobility and all abhor poverty and baseness. This being so, 
how can they attain wealth and nobility and avoid poverty 
and baseness? I say there is nothing to compare with being 
worthy What is the way of worthiness? I say that someone 
who has strength must hasten to use it to help people; 
someone who has material wealth must distribute it to 
people to the best of his ability; someone who possesses 
the Way must encourage people through teaching. In this 
way, those who are hungry will get food, those who are cold 
will get clothing and those who are in disorder will get 
order. If those who are hungry get food, if those who are 
cold get clothing and if those who are in disorder get order, 
this will preserve their lives. 

10.5 ‘At the present time, those whom kings, dukes and 
great officers enrich and ennoble are all blood relatives of 
kings, dukes and great officers, those rich and noble 
without good reason, and those of fine appearance. But how 
are they necessarily wise! If they are not wise, but are made 
to govern the state, then one knows that disorder of the 
state will ensue. At the present time, officers and noble 
men of the world all desire wealth and nobility and all 
abhor poverty and baseness. This being so, how do they act 
to achieve wealth and nobility and avoid poverty and 
baseness? [I] say there is no other way than by being a 



blood relative of a king, duke or great officer, by being rich 
and noble without good reason or by being of fine 
appearance. But [such people] cannot learn to be able. If the 
distinction is not recognized, even someone whose moral 
worth is like that of Yu, Tang, Wen and Wu will not find 
advancement. And even if a blood relative of a king, duke or 
great officer is lame, sick, deaf or blind, or is evil like Jie 
and Zhou, he will not fail to find advancement. The reason 
for this is that rewards do not match worthiness, and 
punishments do not match badness. That is, those who are 
rewarded are without merit and those who are punished are 
without transgression. The effect of this is that the ordinary 
people are lazy and unfocused in their minds, are 
undisciplined in their bodies, are prevented from doing 
good, make no use of the strength of their limbs and make 
no attempt to help and encourage each other. Surplus 
materials are left to rot and decay without being 
distributed. The excellent Way is hidden and concealed 
without being taught and explained. In such a situation, 
those who are hungry don’t get food, those who are cold 
don’t get clothes and those who are in disorder don’t get 
order. 

10.6 ‘This is why it was that in former times, Yao had Shun, 
Shun had Yu, Yu had Gao Yao, Tang had Xiao Chen (Yi Yin) 


and King Wu had Hong Yao, Tai Dian, Nangong Gua and San 
Yisheng, the world was made harmonious, and the masses 
were made prosperous. By these means, those near at hand 
were made peaceful and those who were distant returned. 
Wherever the sun and moon shone, boats and carts reached, 
rain and dew made wet, and grains were what nourished, this 
obtained, and they were invariably encouraged and praised. 
So, at the present time, if kings, dukes, great officers, 
officers and noble men of the world have a genuine wish to 
be ren (loving, kind, humane and benevolent) and yi (right 
acting, righteous and just), and to seek high office, if those 
above desire to be in accord with the Way of the sage kings 
and those below desire to achieve benefit for the state and 
the common people, then exalting worthiness should be the 
method. This is something that must be examined. Exalting 
worthiness is of benefit to Heaven, ghosts and the common 
people, as well as being the foundation of government and 
affairs.’ 



11 


Exalting Unity I 
{Shang Tong 1 Shang) 


11.1 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘Ancient times, when 
people first came into being, were times when there were 
as yet no laws or government. There was the saying: 
“People have different principles.” This meant that if there 
was one person, there was one principle; if there were two 
people, there were two principles; and if there were ten 
people, there were ten principles. Hie more people there 
were, the more things there were that were spoken of as 
principles. It was a case of people affirming their own 
principles and condemning those of other people. The 
consequence of this was mutual condemnation. In this way, 
within a household, fathers and sons, and older and younger 
brothers were resentful and hostile, separated and factious, 
and unable to reach agreement and accord with each other. 


Throughout the world, people all used water and fire, and 
poisons and potions to injure and harm one another. As a 
result, those with strength to spare did not use it to help 
each other in their work, surplus goods rotted and decayed 
and were not used for mutual distribution, and good 
doctrines were hidden and obscured and were not used for 
mutual teaching. So the world was in a state of disorder 
comparable to that among birds and beasts. 

11.2 ‘It is quite clear that what is taken as disorder in the 
world arises from the lack of government leaders. 
Therefore, the one who was the most worthy and able in the 
world was selected and established as the Son of Heaven . 2 
When the Son of Heaven was established, because his 
strength was not enough alone, there was also selection and 
choice of the worthy and able of the world who were set up 
and established as the Three Dukes. When the Son of 
Heaven and the Three Dukes were established, because the 
world was vast and wide and there were people of distant 
countries and different lands, the distinctions between right 
and wrong, and between benefit and harm could not be 
clearly understood by one or two people. There was, 
therefore, division into many states with the establishment 
of feudal lords and rulers of states. When feudal lords and 
rulers of states were established, because their strength 


was not enough alone, there was also the choice and 
selection of the worthy and able of the states and their 
establishment as government leaders. When the 
government leaders were all in place, the Son of Heaven 
issued his decree to the people of the world, which said: 
“On hearing of good or evil, all must inform their superior. 
What the superior takes to be right, all must take to be 
right. What the superior takes to be wrong, all must take to 
be wrong. If those above have faults, admonish them and 
remonstrate with them. If those below do good, inquire 
about them and recommend them. Agreement with 
superiors, not agreement with inferiors, is what superiors 
reward and inferiors praise. If you hear of good or evil and 
don’t inform your superiors, if what your superiors take to 
be right cannot be taken as right and what your superiors 
take to be wrong cannot be taken as wrong, if superiors 
have faults and you don’t admonish them and remonstrate 
with them, if those below are good and you don’t inquire 
about them and recommend them, if those below align 
[with each other] and are unable to align with their 
superiors, this is what those above should punish and what 
the ordinary people should condemn.” Those above took 
this as the basis for rewards and punishments, and examined 
things very clearly to make their judgements reliable. 



11.3 'This is why the village head was the most ren (loving, 
kind, humane and benevolent) man of the village. It was the 
village head who brought administrative order to the people 
of the village, saying: “When you hear of good or evil, you 
must inform your district head. What the district head takes 
to be right, you must all take to be right. What the district 
head takes to be wrong, you must all take to be wrong. Do 
away with bad words and study the good words of the 
district head. Do away with bad actions and study the good 
actions of the district head. How, then, can there be said to 
be disorder in the district?” How do we examine what it is 
that brings order to a district? It is only the district head 
who can make the principles in the district uniform. This is 
how there is order in a district. Tire district head was the 
most ren man of the district. It was the district head who 
brought administrative order to the people of the district, 
saying: “When you hear of good or evil, you must inform 
the ruler of the state. What the ruler of the state takes to be 
right, you must all take to be right. What the ruler of the 
state takes to be wrong, you must all take to be wrong. Do 
away with bad words and study the good words of the ruler 
of the state. Do away with bad actions and study the good 
actions of the ruler of the state. How, then, can there be 
said to be disorder in the state?” 



11.4 ‘How do we examine what it is that brings order to a 
state? It is only the ruler of the state who can make the 
principles of the state uniform. This is how there is order 
in a state. The ruler of a state was the most ren man of the 
state. It was the ruler of the state who brought 
administrative order to the people of the state, saying: 
“When I hear of good or evil, I must inform the Son of 
Heaven. What the Son of Heaven takes to be right, you 
must all take to be right. What the Son of Heaven takes to 
be wrong, you must all take to be wrong. Do away with bad 
words and study the good words of the Son of Heaven. Do 
away with bad actions and study the good actions of the Son 
of Heaven. How, then, can there be said to be disorder in 
the world?” How do we examine what it is that brings order 
to the world? It is only the Son of Heaven who can make 
the principles of the world uniform. This is how there is 
order in the world. When the people of the world all have 
respect for and uniformity with the Son of Heaven, but do 
not have respect for and uniformity with Heaven, calamity 
is still not avoided. Nowadays, if Heaven’s violent storms 
and heavy rains are continuous and extreme, this is 
Heaven’s way of punishing the people for not being in 
accord with Heaven above.’ 



11.5 This is the reason why Master Mo said: ‘The ancient 
sage kings put into effect the five punishments , 3 which was 
how they brought order to their people. They were like the 
main thread in a skein of silk, or the controlling rope of a 
fishing net, and were the means used to bring the ordinary 
people of the world into line when they did not exalt unity 
with their superiors.’ 


12 


Exalting Unity II 
(Shang Tong Zhong ) 


12.1 Master Mo said: ‘If we look back to the past, when 
people first came into being, from the vantage point of the 
present, it was a time when there were not yet any 
government leaders. In fact, there was the saying, “The 
people of the world all differed in their principles.” This 
meant that for one person there was one principle, for ten 
people ten principles, and for a hundred people a hundred 
principles; the more people there were, the more so-called 
principles there were. This also meant that each person 
took his own principle to be right and the principles of 
others to be wrong. As a result, there was mutual 
disagreement. Within the household there was resentment 
and enmity between fathers and sons, and between older 
and younger brothers, since they were all quite disparate in 



their minds and unable to reach mutual agreement. 
Consequently, any surplus energy was wasted (in discord) 
and was not used in working with each other, excellent 
doctrines were kept secret and were not used in teaching 
each other, and surplus materials rotted and decayed and 
were not shared with each other. The disorder of the world 
came to be like that among birds and beasts. There were no 
regulations regarding rulers and ministers, superiors and 
inferiors, and old and young, and there was no propriety (//) 
between fathers and sons, and older and younger brothers. 
This brought disorder to the world. 

12.2 ‘It became clear to people that not having leaders of 
government who could unify the principles of the world 
brought disorder to the world. This was the reason for 
choosing the world’s most worthy, good, sagacious, wise, 
discriminating and clever man, and establishing him as the 
Son of Heaven, giving him the task of bringing unity to the 
principles of the world. Once the Son of Heaven was 
established, his ears and eyes were such that he was not 
able to bring unity to the principles of the world on his 
own. For this reason, he chose men in the world who were 
worthy and good, sagacious and wise, skilled in discussion 
and clever, and established them as the Three Dukes, to join 
with him in the task of bringing unity to the principles of 


the world. When the Son of Heaven and the Three Dukes 
were in place, they realized that the world was vast, and that 
they couldn’t bring the people of the mountains, forests and 
distant lands to a state of unity, so they divided it up and 
established the many feudal lords and rulers of states, 
giving them the task of bringing unity to their own states. 
When the rulers of states were established, it was also the 
case that their ears and eyes were such that they were 
unable to bring unity to the principles of their states, so 
they chose those who were worthy in their states and 
established assistants, generals and great officers, right 
down to heads of districts and villages to join them in the 
task of bringing unity to the principles of their states. 

12.3 ‘When the Son of Heaven, the rulers and feudal lords, 
and the government leaders of the populace had been 
established, the Son of Heaven put forth a decree, saying: 
“Whenever you hear or see something good, you must 
inform your superior. Whenever you hear or see something 
bad, you must also inform your superior. What the superior 
approves of, you must also approve of. What the superior 
condemns, you must also condemn. When the people are 
good, inquire about it and reward them. When superiors are 
at fault, admonish them. Value uniformity with those above 
and do not act in collusion with those below. If those above 



get to know about this, they will reward you. If the ten 
thousand people hear about this, they will praise you. If, on 
the other hand, you hear or see something good and don’t 
inform your superior, or if you hear or see something bad 
and also don’t inform your superior, if you are unable to 
approve of what your superior approves of, if you are 
unable to condemn what your superior condemns, if the 
people are good but you are unable to inquire about them 
and reward them, if your superiors are at fault but you are 
unable to admonish them, if you align with those below and 
and not with those above, and those above find out about 
this, they will reprove and punish you, and if the ordinary 
people hear about this, they will condemn and vilify you.” 
Therefore, the sage kings of ancient times, in establishing 
punishments and administering rewards and praise, 
examined things very clearly to make their judgements 
reliable. 

12.4 ‘In this way, people throughout the world all wished to 
gain the rewards and praise of their superiors and feared 
their condemnation and punishment. This is why the village 
heads complied with the Son of Heaven’s administration 
and unified the principles of their villages. And when the 
village heads had unified the principles of their villages, 
they led the ten thousand people of their villages to exalt 



unity with the district chiefs, saying: “Everywhere the ten 
thousand people of the villages should exalt unity with the 
district chief and not dare to collude with those below. 
What the district chief approves of, they must also approve 
of. What the district chief condemns, they must also 
condemn. Urey must cast aside their own bad words and 
learn from the good words of the district chief. Urey must 
cast aside their own bad actions and learn from the good 
actions of the district chief. The district chief is certainly 
the most worthy man of the district. If all the people of the 
district take the district chief as their model, how can it be 
said that the district is not well ordered?” And what do you 
think was the cause of the district chief bringing order to 
the district? I say it was only that he was able to unify its 
principles. This is how a district becomes well ordered. 

12.5 ‘When the district chief had brought order to his 
district and the district was well ordered, he led the ten 
thousand people of his district to exalt unity with the ruler 
of the state, saying: “In general, the ten thousand people of 
the district should all exalt unity with the ruler of the state 
and not dare to collude with those below. What the ruler of 
the state approves of, they must also approve of. What the 
ruler of the state condemns, they must also condemn. Urey 
should cast aside their own bad words and learn from the 



good words of the ruler of the state. Urey should cast aside 
their own bad actions and learn from the good actions of 
the ruler of the state. Hie ruler of the state is certainly the 
state’s most worthy man. If all the people of the state take 
its ruler as their model, how can it be said that the state is 
not well ordered?” And what do you think was the cause of 
the ruler of the state bringing order to the state so it was 
well ordered? I say, it was only that he was able to unify the 
principles of his state. Hiis is how a state becomes well 
ordered. 

12.6 ‘When the ruler of a state had brought order to his 
state, and the state was well ordered, he led the ten 
thousand people of his state to exalt unity with the Son of 
Heaven, saying: “In general, the ten thousand people of the 
state should all exalt unity with the Son of Heaven and not 
dare to collude with those below. What the Son of Heaven 
approves of, they must also approve of. What the Son of 
Heaven condemns, they must also condemn. Urey should 
cast aside their own bad words and learn from the good 
words of the Son of Heaven. Urey should cast aside their 
own bad actions and learn from the good actions of the Son 
of Heaven. Tire Son of Heaven is certainly the world’s most 
ren (loving, kind, humane and benevolent) man. If the ten 
thousand people of the world take the Son of Heaven as 



their model, how can it be said that the world is not well 
ordered?” And what do you think was the cause of the Son 
of Heaven bringing order to the world? I say, it was only 
that he was able to unify the principles of the world. This is 
how the world becomes well ordered. 

12.7 ‘If the world exalts unity with the Son of Heaven, but 
doesn’t yet exalt unity with Heaven, then Heaven’s 
calamities will still not stop. Therefore, it is right to expect 
Heaven to send down cold and heat without moderation, to 
[send down] snow, frost, rain and dew out of season, 
causing the five grains not to ripen, the six animals not to 
flourish, and pestilence and plague to occur, as well as 
whirlwinds and flooding rains. And these will be unceasing 
and extreme. These are the punishments Heaven brings 
down with the intention of punishing the people below who 
don’t exalt unity with Heaven. Thus it was that in ancient 
times, the sage kings had a clear understanding of what 
Heaven and ghosts wished for and avoided what Heaven and 
ghosts abominated. So they sought to promote the world’s 
benefits and eliminate the world’s harms. This is why they 
led the ten thousand people of the world by fasting and 
bathing, and purifying the vessels of sweet wine and millet 
to offer sacrifice to Heaven and the ghosts. In their serving 
of ghosts and spirits, they dared not have vessels of sweet 



wine and millet that were not clean and pure; they dared not 
have sacrificial animals that were not sleek and fat; they 
dared not have jade tablets and silk offerings that did not 
conform to standard measurements. In the spring and 
autumn sacrifices, they did not dare miss the proper time. 
In hearing lawsuits, they did not dare to be unfair. In 
distributing wealth, they did not dare to be inequitable. In 
their ordinary dwellings, they did not dare to be 
disrespectful. I say that their being government leaders like 
this was the reason Heaven and the ghosts above were 
generous towards them in their conduct of government, and 
the ten thousand people below were of benefit to them in 
their conduct of government. Since Heaven and ghosts 
were profoundly generous, they could be resolute in 
carrying out their business, and so the blessings of Heaven 
and ghosts could be obtained. Since the ten thousand 
people were of benefit to them, they could be resolute in 
carrying out their business, and so the love of the ten 
thousand people could be obtained. Hieir conducting 
government like this was why their plans were realized and 
the business they undertook was successful. In defence, 
they were secure. In attack, they were victorious. Why was 
this so? I say it was just that they were able to exalt unity in 
the conduct of government. Hrerefore, in ancient times, the 
sage kings conducted government like this.’ 



12.8 Nowadays, the people of the world say: ‘At the 
present time, the government leaders of the world still 
haven’t abandoned the world, and yet the world is in 
disorder. What is the reason for this?’ Master Mo says: ‘At 
the present time, those who are government leaders are 
fundamentally different from those of ancient times. It is 
like the case of the Yru Miao and their use of the five 
punishments. In former times, the sage kings formulated 
the five punishments for the purpose of bringing order to 
the world. When it came to the You Miao’s formulation of 
the five punishments, this brought disorder to the world. 
Does this mean, then, that the punishments themselves 
were not good? No, it means that the use of punishments 
was not good. This is wiry, in the words of the book of the 
former kings, the “Punishments of Lii”, it is said: ‘The 
Miao people were not selective in their use of 
punishments. They just established the five violent 
punishments and called them laws.” 1 This says that those 
who were skilled in the use of punishments used them to 
bring order to the people, whereas those who were not 
skilled in the use of punishments conceived of the five 
violent punishments. Does this mean that punishment itself 
was not good? No, it was the use of punishments that was 
not good. Therefore, the five violent punishments 
subsequently arose. This is wiry, in the words of the 


writings of the former kings, the Shu Ling, 2 it is said: ‘The 
mouth may emit what is good or it may promote warfare.” 
This is to say that those who are skilled in the use of the 
mouth emit what is good, [whereas] those who are not 
skilled in the use of the mouth use it to slander and incite 
enmity Does this mean that the mouth itself is not good? 
No, it is the use of the mouth that is not good. Therefore, it 
is subsequently used to slander and incite enmity. 

12.9 ‘Thus, in ancient times, the establishment of 
government leaders was intended to bring order to the 
people. It may be compared to silk threads being gathered 
into a skein or a fishing net having a main rope, in that they 
were what was used to draw together the depraved and cruel 
[people] of the world and cause them to have unity of their 
principles. This is why the book of the former kings, the 
“Xiang Nian”, 3 has this to say: “In the establishment of 
states and the setting up of cities, the creation of rulers, 
kings, princes and dukes was not so they could be proud. 
The appointment of ministers and officials was not so they 
could live in idleness. It was for the apportionment of 
responsibility for the peace of the world.” This says that in 
ancient times the Supreme Ruler and ghosts and spirits, in 
setting up states and cities, established leaders of 
government not for the sake of giving them high rank or 


large salaries, or to live in a state of wealth, opulence, 
licentiousness and ease, but so they could act for the ten 
thousand people, promoting benefit and eliminating harm. 
It was so they could enrich the poor and make the few 
many, bring peace where there was danger and order where 
there was disorder. Urns, the way the ancient sage kings 
conducted government was like this. 

12.10 ‘Nowadays, kings, dukes and great officers who 
conduct government are the opposite of this. Government 
is by flatterers and sycophants. Kindred, in the form of 
fathers and elder brothers, and old friends and 
acquaintances are used as assistants and established as 
government leaders. The people know that those above, in 
establishing government leaders, are not doing so for the 
purpose of bringing order to the people. This is why the 
people all form cliques and deceive one another. It is why 
they are not willing to value unity with their superiors. This 
is why there is no unity of principles, either above or 
below. If those above and below don’t have unity of 
principles, rewards and praise are not enough to encourage 
goodness, and punishments and penalties are not enough to 
put a stop to evil. How do I know this is so? Suppose the 
ruler in establishing and conducting the government in a 
state and making government leaders for the people claims 



that if there are people who should be rewarded, he will 
reward them. If those above and below don’t have unity of 
principles, then those the ruler rewards will be those the 
people condemn. But I say it is the people who live with 
them every day and it is by the people that they are 
condemned. Then even if people are rewarded by the ruler, 
this will not be enough to encourage them. Suppose the 
ruler in establishing and conducting the government in a 
state and making government leaders for the people claims 
that if there are people who should be punished, he will 
punish them. But if above and below there is not unity of 
principles, then those whom the ruler punishes will be 
those the people praise. But I say it is the people who live 
with them every day and it is by the people that they are 
praised. Then even if they are punished by the ruler, this 
will not be enough to stop them. If in establishing and 
conducting government and creating leaders of the people, 
rewards and praise are not enough to encourage goodness, 
and punishments and penalties do not stop evil, then is this 
not the same as I originally described a little earlier as the 
time when people first came into existence and did not 
have government leaders! If having government leaders is 
just the same as the time when there were no government 
leaders, this is not the way to bring order to the people and 
unity to the masses. 



12.11 ‘Therefore, the sage kings of ancient times, because 
they were able to select carefully people who exalted unity 
and make them leaders of government, ensured that the 
feelings of those above and below were in harmony. If 
those above had any matters that hadn’t been planned or 
benefits that hadn’t been initiated, those below learned of 
these and achieved them. If those below had any stored up 
resentments or accumulated harms, those above learned of 
these and eliminated them. So it was that if there was 
someone who had done good several thousand or even ten 
thousand li away, although family members were unaware 
of it and district and village had not heard of it at all, the 
Son of Heaven learned of it and rewarded him. And if there 
was someone who had done evil several thousand or even 
ten thousand li away, although family members were 
unaware of it and district and village had not heard of it at 
all, the Son of Heaven learned of it and punished him. Thus 
the people of the world were all fearful, agitated and 
awestruck, and did not dare act in a depraved or evil manner, 
saying that the Son of Heaven’s sight and hearing were 
those of a spirit. But words of the former kings say: ‘He is 
not a spirit. It is only that he is able to use the ears and eyes 
of the people to help Iris own sight and hearing, to use the 
lips of the people to help his own speech, to use the minds 
of the people to help Iris own plans and to use the limbs of 



the people to help his own actions.” If those who help his 
sight and hearing are many, then what he hears and sees is 
far-distant. If those who help his speech are many, then the 
comfort given by his wise words is far-reaching. If those 
who help his plans are many, then his schemes and devices 
are swiftly accomplished. If those who help him in his 
activities are many, then the matters he embarks upon will 
be swiftly brought to completion. 

12.12 ‘There was no other reason why the sages of ancient 
times brought their achievements to completion and passed 
their reputations down to later generations than that they 
were able to conduct their administration by means of 
exalting unity. This is why, among the writings of the 
former kings, in the “Hymns of Zhou”, there is the 
statement: “[Tire feudal lords] first came to see the Zhou 
king. It is said they sought from him the regulations.” This 
tells how, in ancient times, the rulers of states and the 
feudal lords came to the Son of Heaven’s court in spring 
and autumn to pay their respects and to receive his strict 
instructions. Then they returned to rule their states and 
implement these instructions, and there was not one who 
dared not comply. At that time, there was basically no one 
who dared disregard the Son of Heaven’s instructions. Tire 
Odes says: “My horses are white and black-maned; the six 



reins look glossy. I gallop the horses and urge them on, 
everywhere seeking information and advice.” It also says: 
“My horses are piebald; the six reins are like silk. I gallop 
the horses, and urge them on, everywhere seeking 
information and counsel”, so telling of these conditions. In 
ancient times, the rulers of states and the feudal lords, 
when they heard or saw something good or bad, all rode 
swiftly to inform the Son of Heaven. Hris is why rewards 
were appropriately given to the worthy and punishments 
appropriately inflicted on the bad. The innocent were not 
put to death nor were the guilty let off. Hris, then, was the 
good outcome of exalting unity.’ 

12.13 Hris is why Master Mo said: ‘Nowadays, if kings, 
dukes, great officers, officers and noble men of the world 
sincerely wish to enrich their states, make their people 
many, bring order to their government and establish their 
altars of soil and grain, then it is proper that they cannot do 
otherwise than examine exalting unity. Hris is the 
foundation.’ 



13 


Exalting Unity III 
(Slicing Tong Xia ) 


13.1 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘Tire business of one who is 
wise must be to work out what it is that brings order to the 
ordinary people of the state and do it, and to work out what 
it is that brings disorder to the ordinary people of the state 
and avoid it. So how does he work out what it is that brings 
order to the ordinary people of the state? If the ruler in 
carrying out government understands the feelings 
(conditions) of those below him, there is order; if he does 
not understand the feelings (conditions) of those below 
him, there is disorder. How do I know this to be so? If the 
ruler in carrying out government understands the feelings 
(conditions) of those below him, this means he will have a 
clear understanding of what is good and bad among the 
people. If he has a clear understanding of what is good and 



bad among the people, then in this case, he will recognize 
those who are good and reward them, and he will recognize 
those who are bad and punish them. If he rewards those who 
are good and punishes those who are bad, then the state will 
certainly be well ordered. [Conversely,] if the ruler in 
carrying out government does not understand the feelings 
(conditions) of those below him, this means he will not 
have a clear understanding of what is good and bad among 
the people. If he does not have a clear understanding of 
what is good and bad among the people, then in this case, he 
will not recognize those who are good and reward them, 
and he will not recognize those who are bad and punish 
them. If those who are good are not rewarded and those 
who are bad are not punished, and government is conducted 
like this, the state and its populace will certainly be in 
disorder. Therefore, failure of rewards and punishments to 
accord with the feelings (conditions) of those below is a 
matter which must be examined.’ 

13.2 This being so, howwill the feelings (conditions) of 
those below be determined and recognized? On this point, 
Master Mo said: ‘It is only possible through carrying out 
government by exalting unity of principles. After this, it is 
possible. How do I know that exalting unity of principles is 
possible and can be used to govern the world? How else 



than by examining the way government was conducted when 
it first came into existence. In ancient times, when Heaven 
first gave rise to people, there were no government leaders 
and each person was his own master. If each person was his 
own master, then for one person there was one principle, 
for ten people ten principles, for a hundred people a 
hundred principles, for a thousand people a thousand 
principles and so on up to the point where the great number 
of people could not be counted. At this time then, what 
were termed principles also could not be counted. This 
meant that everyone affirmed their own principles and 
rejected the principles of others with the result that there 
was fighting over what was weighty and contention over 
what was trivial. 

13.3 ‘This resulted in the world’s desire to unify the 
principles of the world, so there was the selection of one 
who was worthy and he was established as the Son of 
Heaven. Because the Son of Heaven knew that his strength 
alone was not sufficient to bring order to the world, he 
selected his deputies and established them as the Three 
Dukes. Hre Three Dukes also knew that their strength alone 
was not sufficient to assist the Son of Heaven, so they 
divided the state and established the feudal lords. lire 
feudal lords also knew that their strength alone was not 



sufficient to bring order to the territory within their four 
boundaries, so they selected assistants and established 
them as ministers and stewards. The ministers and stewards 
also knew that their strength alone was not sufficient to 
assist their ruler, so they selected assistants and established 
them as district heads and regional chiefs. Tire reason wiry 
in ancient times the Son of Heaven established the Three 
Dukes, the feudal lords, ministers and stewards, district 
heads and regional chiefs was not especially to select them 
for riches and honour, leisure and ease, but to help in 
bringing order to government. Thus in ancient times, states 
were created and cities built; also rulers, kings, princes and 
dukes were established and ministers, officers, 
administrators and regional heads were appointed. This was 
not because they wished to make them happy by using 
them, but by distinguishing them to use them to help bring 
enlightened order to the world. 

13.4 ‘At the present time, wiry is it that there are superiors, 
and yet they are unable to bring order to inferiors; wiry is it 
that there are inferiors, and yet they are unable to serve 
their superiors? It is because superiors and inferiors harm 
one another. Why is this so? It is because principles are not 
uniform. If principles are not uniform, there are factions. 
For example, if a superior considers someone to be good, 



he will reward him. But if this person gets the superior’s 
reward, and yet he cannot escape vilification by the 
common people, his being good certainly cannot be 
encouraged by being rewarded. [Conversely,] if a superior 
considers someone to be bad, he will punish him. But if 
this person suffers the superior’s punishment, and yet he is 
comforted by the praise of the common people, his being 
bad certainly cannot be prevented by being punished. So it 
was determined that rewards and praise from those above 
are not enough to encourage goodness, and censure and 
punishment are not enough to prevent evil. What is the 
reason for this being so? It is because principles are not 
unified.’ 

13.5 So then, if we wish to unify the principles of the 
world, how can it be done? On this point, Master Mo spoke, 
saying: ‘Why not try getting the leaders of houses to issue 
a proclamation to their families, saying: “If you see 
someone who loves and benefits the family, you must make 
it known. If you see someone who hates and harms the 
family, you also must make it known. If you inform about 
someone who loves and benefits the family, this too is like 
loving and benefiting the family. If those above learn of 
this, they will reward the person. If the masses hear of this, 
they will praise the person. If you do not inform about 



someone who hates and harms the family, this too is like 
hating and harming the family. If those above learn of this, 
they will punish the person. If the masses hear of this, they 
will condemn the person.” If this is generally applied to 
members of families, they will all want to get the rewards 
and praise of their superiors and avoid their censure and 
punishment. Thus, if what is good is spoken about and what 
is bad is spoken about, the family head will learn of the 
good people and reward them, and will learn of the bad 
people and punish them. If the good people are rewarded 
and the bad people are punished, the family will certainly 
be well ordered. So what is it that determines that a family 
is well ordered? It is nothing more than being able to exalt 
unity of principles as the basis for administration. 

13.6 ‘Now if families are already well ordered, does this 
mean that the way of ordering the state is already 
complete? It does not. A state comprises a very great 
number of families, and if all consider their own family to 
be right and the families of others to be wrong, this means 
that on substantial matters there is disorder and on minor 
matters there is contention. Therefore, it should also be the 
case that the family chiefs unify the principles of their own 
families and bring them into accord with the ruler of the 
state. The ruler of the state should also issue a 



proclamation to all its people, saying: “If you see someone 
who loves and benefits the state, you must make it known. 

If you see someone who hates and harms the state, you 
must also make it known. If you inform about someone 
who loves and benefits the state, this too is like loving and 
benefiting the state. If those above learn of it, they will 
reward the person. If the masses hear about it, they will 
praise the person. If you see someone who hates and harms 
the state and do not inform about it, this too is like hating 
and harming the state. If those above learn of it, they will 
punish the person. If the masses hear about it, they will 
condemn the person.” If this is generally applied to the 
people of the state, they will all want to get the rewards and 
praise of their leaders and avoid their censure and 
punishment. This is why, if the people see someone who is 
good, they will speak of it, and if they see someone who is 
bad, they will speak of it, so the ruler of the state will learn 
of the good people and reward them, and will learn of the 
bad people and punish them. If the good people are 
rewarded and the bad people are punished, the state will 
certainly be well ordered. So what is it that determines that 
a state is well ordered? It is nothing more than being able to 
exalt unity of principles as the basis for administration. 



13.7 ‘Now if the states are already well ordered, does this 
mean that the way of ordering the world is already 
complete? It does not. The world comprises a great number 
of states, and all consider their own state to be right and the 
states of others to be wrong. This means that on substantial 
matters there is armed conflict and on minor matters there 
is contention. Therefore, it should also be the case that the 
rulers of states unify the principles of their own states and 
exalt unity with the Son of Heaven. Tire Son of Heaven 
should also issue a proclamation to all the people of the 
world, saying: “If you see someone who loves and benefits 
the world, you must make it known. If you see someone 
who hates and harms the world, you must also make it 
known. If you inform about someone who loves and 
benefits the world, this too is like loving and benefiting the 
world. If those above learn of it, they will reward the 
person. If the masses hear about it, they will praise the 
person. If you see someone who hates and harms the world 
and do not inform about it, this too is like hating and 
harming the world. If those above learn of it, they will 
punish the person. If the masses hear about it, they will 
condemn the person.” If this is generally applied to the 
people of the world, they will all want to get the rewards 
and praise of their leaders and avoid their censure and 
punishment. This means that if they see someone who is 



good or someone who is bad, they make it known. If the 
Son of Heaven learns of the good people and rewards them 
and learns of the bad people and punishes them, so the good 
people are rewarded and the bad people are punished, then 
the world will certainly be well ordered. So what is it that 
determines that the world is well ordered? It is nothing 
more than being able to exalt unity of principles as the 
basis of administration. 

13.8 ‘If the world is already well ordered, it means that the 
Son of Heaven has also unified the principles of the world 
through exalting unity with Heaven. It is right that exalting 
unity is a theory. When used on the highest scale by the Son 
of Heaven, it can bring order to the world. When used on a 
moderate scale by feudal lords, it can bring order to their 
states. When used on a small scale by family chiefs, it can 
bring order to their families. Hris means that if it is used on 
a large scale, it brings order to the world and is not 
deficient, while if it is used on a small scale, it brings order 
to one state or one family and is not filled up. Hris is wiry it 
is spoken of as the Way.’ 

13.9 Hrerefore, it is said that bringing order to the states of 
the world is like bringing order to a single family. Making 
proper use of the people of the world is like making proper 



use of one person. How could anyone think that Master Mo 
alone had this [principle] and that the former kings did not 
have this which he had? Urey were also like this. The sage 
kings all used exalting unity in governing, therefore the 
world was brought to order. How do I know this was so? It 
is in the writings of the former kings. The words of ‘The 
Great Oath’ say: ‘If a lesser man sees or hears of something 
villainous or wicked and does not speak, he displays an 
equivalent fault.’ This is like saying, if someone sees 
something depraved and perverse and does not report it, his 
fault is also like that of the one who is depraved and 
perverse. 

13.10 Therefore, in the case of the sage kings of ancient 
times who governed the world, those whom they selected 
to be their aides and assistants 1 were all men of outstanding 
ability, and there were many to help them see and hear. As a 
result, when they made plans for people, they realized them 
before others would have, and when they managed affairs 
for people, they brought them to completion before others 
would have. Praise for their fine reputation was heard 
before that for others. Only because they put their trust in 
the people in conducting affairs did they enjoy benefits like 
this. In ancient times, there was this saying: ‘Seeing with 
one eye is not like seeing with two eyes. Hearing with one 


ear is not like hearing with two ears. Grasping something 
with one hand is not like the strength of two hands.’ And it 
was only because they were able to put their trust in the 
people in conducting affairs that they enjoyed benefits like 
this. This is why, when the ancient sage kings governed the 
world, if there was a worthy man more than a thousand li 
away, while the people of his district and village had not yet 
all heard of him or seen him, the sage kings learned of him 
and rewarded him. And if there was an evil man more than a 
thousand li away, while the people of his district and village 
had not yet all heard of him or seen him, the sage kings 
learned of him and punished him. Was this because the sage 
kings were particularly sharp of hearing and keen of sight? 
How can one person look and see what is more than a 
thousand li away, or listen and hear what is more than a 
thousand li away! Tire sage kings did not go themselves to 
look; they did not go themselves to listen. Nevertheless, 
they made it so that the robbers and bandits of the world, 
although they might travel all over the world, could find no 
place of refuge. How was this so? It was because they took 
exalting unity to be the pinnacle of government. 

13.11 This is why Master Mo said: ‘If anyone directs the 
people to exalt unity but does not love the people deeply, 
he will find that the people cannot be directed. It is said that 



one must deeply love the people to direct them, and have 
trust in them to control them. One must lead them with 
riches and honour from the front, and pursue them with 
clearly understood punishments from behind. If I were to 
conduct government like this, even if I wished there were 
not unity with me, I would not be able to achieve this.’ 

13.12 This is wiry Master Mo said: ‘If, nowadays, the kings, 
dukes, great officers, officers and noble men of the world 
sincerely wish to become ren (loving, kind, humane and 
benevolent) and yi (right acting, righteous and just), and 
seek to be superior officers, and if above, they wish to be 
in accord with the Way of the sage kings, and below, they 
wish to benefit the ordinary people of the state, they must 
recognize the validity of the concept of exalting unity and 
must look upon it as the foundation of government and the 
essential element of bringing order to a state.’ 



14 


Universal Love I 
(.Jian AV Shang ) 


14.1 A sage is one who takes the ordering of the world to 
be Iris business, so he must know what disorder arises 
from; then he can bring order to the world. If he doesn’t 
know what disorder arises from, he is unable to bring about 
order. It is, for example, like a doctor treating a person’s 
illness. He must know what the illness arises from; then he 
is able to treat it. If he doesn’t know what the illness arises 
from, he is unable to treat it. How can bringing order to 
disorder be the only thing that isn’t like this? One must 
know the source of disorder; then one is able to bring about 
order. If one doesn’t know the source of disorder, one is 
unable to bring about order. 

14.2 A sage, being someone who takes the ordering of the 
world to be his business, must examine what disorder 


arises from. How does he attempt to examine what disorder 
arises from? It arises because people don’t love each other. 
Ministers and sons not being filial towards rulers and 
fathers is what is spoken of as disorder. If a son loves 
himself but doesn’t love his father, then he disadvantages 2 
the father and benefits himself. If a younger brother loves 
himself but doesn’t love his older brother, then he 
disadvantages the older brother and benefits himself. If a 
minister loves himself but doesn’t love his prince, then he 
disadvantages the prince and benefits himself. This is what 
is spoken of as disorder. If a father doesn’t feel affection 
for his son, or an older brother doesn’t feel affection for 
his younger brothers, or a prince doesn’t feel affection for 
his ministers, this too is spoken of as disorder in the world. 
When a father loves himself but doesn’t love his sons, then 
he disadvantages the sons and benefits himself. When an 
older brother loves himself but doesn’t love his younger 
brothers, then he disadvantages the younger brothers and 
benefits himself. When a ruler loves himself but doesn’t 
love his ministers, then he disadvantages the ministers and 
benefits himself. How is this? In all cases it arises through 
lack of mutual love. Even if we come to those who are 
thieves and robbers in the world, the same applies in so far 
as they love their own household but don’t love the 
households of others. Hierefore, they plunder the 


households of others in order to benefit their own 
households. Arobber loves himself but not others. 
Therefore he robs others in order to benefit himself. How 
is this? In all cases it arises through lack of mutual love. 
Even if we come to the disorder that great officers bring to 
each other’s households and the attacks made by the feudal 
lords on each other’s states, it is the same thing. Great 
officers each love their own household but don’t love the 
households of others. Therefore they bring disorder to the 
households of others in order to benefit their own 
household. Feudal lords each love their own state but don’t 
love the states of others. Therefore, they attack the states 
of others in order to benefit their own state. Disorder in 
the world is entirely this and nothing else. If we examine 
this, from what source does it arise? In all cases it is due to 
lack of mutual love. 

14.3 If there were universal mutual love in the world, with 
the love of others being like the love of oneself, would 
there still be anyone who was not filial? If one were to 
regard one’s father, older brothers and ruler like oneself, 
how could one not be filial towards them? Would there still 
be anyone who did not feel affection? If one were to regard 
younger brothers, sons or ministers like oneself, how 
could one not love them? Therefore, there would be no one 



who was not filial or affectionate. Would there still be 
thieves and robbers? If there were regard for the 
households of others like one’s own household, who would 
steal? If there were regard for the persons of others like 
one’s own person, who would rob? Therefore, thieves and 
robbers would also disappear. Would there still be great 
officers who brought disorder to each other’s households 
or feudal lords who attacked each other’s states? If there 
were regard for the households of others like one’s own 
household, who would bring about disorder? If there were 
regard for the states of others like one’s own state, who 
would attack? Therefore, there would be no instances of 
great officers bringing disorder to each other’s houses or 
of feudal lords attacking each other’s states. If the world 
had universal mutual love, then states would not attack each 
other, households would not bring disorder to each other, 
there would be no thieves and robbers, and rulers, 
ministers, fathers and sons could all be filial and loving. In 
this way, then, there would be order in the world. 

Therefore, how can sages who make it their business to 
bring order to the world do otherwise than prohibit hatred 
and encourage love? So if there is universal mutual love in 
the world, there is order, whereas if there is exchange of 
mutual hatred, there is disorder. This is wiry Master Mo 



said: ‘One cannot do other than encourage the love of 
others.’ 



15 


Universal Love II 
(.Jian Ai Zhong ) 


15.1 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘Tire way in which the ren 
(loving, kind, humane and benevolent) man conducts affairs 
must be to promote the benefits of the world and eliminate 
its harms, and in this way to conduct his affairs.’ If this is 
so, then what are the world’s benefits? What are the world’s 
harms? 

Master Mo said: ‘Now states attacking one another, 
households usurping one another, people injuring one 
another, rulers and ministers not being [respectively] kind 
and loyal, fathers and sons not being [respectively] loving 
and filial, and older and younger brothers not being in 
accord and harmonious - these are the world’s harms.’ 


15.2 This being so, how can we examine what these harms 
arise from? Do they not arise through mutual love? Master 



Mo spoke, saying: ‘They arise through lack of mutual love. 
Nowadays, feudal lords only know to love their own states 
but not to love the states of others; they have no qualms 
about mobilizing their own state to attack another’s state. 
Nowadays, heads of households only know to love their 
own household but not to love the households of others; 
they have no qualms about promoting their own household 
and usurping another’s household. Nowadays, individual 
people only know to love their own persons and not to love 
the persons of others; they have no qualms about promoting 
their own persons and injuring the persons of others. For 
this reason, if the feudal lords don’t love each other, there 
are inevitably savage battles; if heads of households don’t 
love each other, there is inevitably mutual usurpation; and if 
individuals don’t love each other, there is inevitably mutual 
injury. If rulers and ministers don’t love each other, there is 
no kindness or loyalty; if fathers and sons don’t love each 
other, there is no compassion or filial conduct; and if older 
and younger brothers don’t love each other, there is no 
accord or harmony. When the people of the world don’t all 
love one another, then the strong inevitably dominate the 
weak, the many inevitably plunder the few, the rich 
inevitably ridicule the poor, the noble inevitably scorn the 
lowly and the cunning inevitably deceive the foolish. 

Within the world, in all cases, the reason why calamity, 



usurpation, resentment and hatred arise is because mutual 
love does not exist, which is why those who are ren 
condemn this state of affairs.’ 

15.3 Since they already condemn it, how can it be changed? 
Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘It can be changed by the 
methods of universal mutual love and exchange of mutual 
benefit.’ This being so, what are the methods of universal 
mutual love and exchange of mutual benefit? Master Mo 
said: ‘People would view others’ states as they view their 
own states; they would view others’ households as they 
view their own households; they would view other people 
as they view themselves. As a result, the feudal lords would 
love one another and there would be no savage battles. 
Heads of households would love one another and would not 
usurp one another. Individual people would love one 
another and would not injure one another. Rulers and 
ministers would love one another and there would be 
kindness and loyalty. Fathers and sons would love one 
another and there would be compassion and filial conduct. 
Older and younger brothers would love one another and 
there would be accord and harmony. If the people of the 
world all loved one another, the strong would not dominate 
the weak, the many would not plunder the few, the rich 
would not ridicule the poor, the noble would not scorn the 



lowly and the cunning would not deceive the foolish. 
Speaking generally, because there was mutual love, there 
would be nothing in the world to cause calamity, 
usurpation, resentment and hatred to arise. This is why 
those who are ren praise it.’ 

15.4 Nevertheless, nowadays officers and noble men of the 
world say: ‘That may be so. If it were universal, it would be 
good. However, in the world it is a difficult matter.’ Master 
Mo spoke, saying: ‘This is only because the officers and 
noble men of the world don’t recognize its benefits or 
understand the reasons for it. At the present time, attacking 
cities, fighting on the battlefield and sacrificing oneself for 
fame are all things that the ordinary people of the world 
find difficult. However, if the ruler advocates these things, 
officers and people can do them. By comparison, universal 
mutual love and exchange of mutual benefit are quite 
different from these tilings. If a person loves others, then 
others must as a result love that person. If a person benefits 
others, then others must as a result benefit that person. If a 
person hates others, then others must as a result hate that 
person. If a person harms others, then others must as a 
result harm that person. Where is the difficulty? It is only 
because those above don’t make it part of their government 
that their officers see no reason to do it. 



15.5 ‘In former times, Duke Wen of Jin liked his officials 
to wear clothing of poor quality, so they all wore garments 
of ewe’s wool, carried their swords in ox-hide belts and had 
caps of rough silk. On entering, they attended the ruler. On 
leaving, they walked from the court. Why did they do these 
things? The ruler liked these things so his officials did 
them. 

15.6 ‘In former times, King Ling of Chu liked officers with 
slender waists so King Ling’s officials limited themselves 
to one meal a day, fastened their belts after breathing in and 
needed the support of a wall to stand up. Within a year, the 
faces of the court officials had become dark and sallow. 
Why did they do these things? lire ruler liked them so his 
officials were able to do them. Formerly, the Yuc king, Gou 
Jian, loved officers who were brave and advised his 
officials of this. Then, privately, he ordered a man to set 
fire to his palace to put his officers to the test, saying: “All 
the treasures of the Yuc kingdom are in there.” Tire Yue 
king himself struck the drum for his officers to advance. 
When they heard the sound of the drum, they rushed 
forward in a disorderly rabble. Around a hundred men lost 
their lives in the fire, lire King o I' Yuc then beat the gong to 
sound the retreat.’ 



15.7 For this reason, Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘Now 
things like eating little, wearing poor quality clothes and 
sacrificing one’s life for the sake of fame are all things that 
the ordinary people of the world find difficult. But if the 
ruler takes pleasure in them, the masses are able to do 
them. By comparison, universal mutual love and exchange 
of mutual benefit are quite different from these things. If a 
person loves others, then others as a result also love that 
person. If a person benefits others, then others as a result 
also benefit that person. If a person hates others, then 
others as a result also hate that person. If a person harms 
others, then others as a result also harm that person. What 
is the difficulty in this? It is only because the ruler doesn’t 
make it part of his government that his officers see no 
reason to do it.’ 

15.8 Nevertheless, nowadays officers and noble men of the 
world say: ‘That may be so. If it were universal, it would be 
good. However, this is something that cannot be done. It is 
comparable to lifting up Mount Tai and jumping over the 
Yellow River and the Qi Waters with it.’ Master Mo said: 
‘That is not a valid comparison. Lifting up Mount Tai and 
jumping over the Yellow River with it could be said to be a 
feat of extraordinary strength. From ancient times to the 
present, no one has been able to do this. By comparison, 



universal mutual love and exchange of mutual benefit are 
quite different from this. The sage kings of ancient times 
practised these things. How do I know this was so? In 
ancient times, when Yu brought order to the world, in the 
west he controlled the West River and Yudou by diverting 
the waters of the Ju and the Sunxing. In the north he 
controlled the Fang, Quan and Gu waters by making them 
drain into Zhaoyuqi and into the Hutuo River and dividing 
them with Dizhu Mountain. He tunnelled through Longmen 
in order to bring benefit to the Yan, Dai, Hu and He (Mo) 
and the people of the Western (Yellow) River. In the east he 
controlled the waters of the Great Plain (Dalu) by blocking 
off the marsh at Mengzhu and also by dividing them into 
nine channels in order to restrict the waters of the eastern 
lands and so benefit the people of Jizhou. In the south, he 
made the Jiang, Han, Huai and Ru Rivers flow eastward and 
drain into the region of the five lakes to benefit the people 
of Jing, Chu, Gan and Yiie and the Nan Yi. This tells us of 
the affairs of Yu [and shows] that now we could practise 
universal [love]. 

15.9 ‘In former times, when King Wen brought order to the 
western lands, he was like the sun and the moon. For the 
first time, there was brightness in the four regions and the 
western lands. He made it so that great states did not insult 



small states, that the many and numerous did not insult the 
solitary and few, that the cruel and powerful did not snatch 
away the different kinds of millet, or the dogs and pigs of 
farmers. And Heaven looked down on King Wen’s 
compassion so that those who were old and without sons 
had what they needed to live out their lives; those who were 
poor and friendless and without older or younger brothers 
had the various things they needed to mix with other 
people; and those who had lost their parents when young 
could rely on what they needed to grow up. This speaks of 
the affairs of King Wen [and shows] that we could now 
practise universal [love]. In former times, when King Wu 
was about to offer a sacrifice at Mount Tai, he said: “Spirits 
of Tai Shan, I, the King of Zhou, have come to offer 
sacrifice. Tire great matter has now been accomplished and 
men of ren arise to come to the aid of all the central states 
and the barbarians of all regions. And although there are 
kinsmen of the Zhou house, it is not as if they are men of 
ren. In every direction there are crimes and I am only one 
man.” This speaks of the affairs of King Wu [and shows] 
that now we could practise universal [love].’ 

15.10 Hris is wiry Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘Nowadays, 
officers and noble men of the world, if they truly wish the 
world to be wealthy and abhor its poverty, if they wish the 



world to be well ordered and abhor its disorder, should take 
universal mutual love and exchange of mutual benefit as 
right. These were the methods of the sage kings and the 
Way of order for the world, so it is impossible not to 
pursue them assiduously.’ 



16 


Universal Love III 
(Jian Ai Xia ) 


16.1 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘Tire business of the man 
who is ren (loving, kind, humane and benevolent) must be 
to seek diligently to promote the world’s benefits and 
eliminate the world’s harms.’ This being so, which of the 
world’s harms are the greatest at the present time? [Master 
Mo] said: ‘Great states attacking small states, great 
households bringing disorder to small households, the 
strong plundering the weak, the many ill-treating the few, 
the cunning scheming against the foolish and the noble 
being arrogant towards the lowly - these are the world’s 
harms. In addition, rulers not being kind, ministers not 
being loyal, fathers not being compassionate and sons not 
being filial are among the world’s harms too. Furthermore, 
at the present time, base men make use of weapons, 



poisons, water and fire to injure and harm one another. This 
too is harmful to the world. Let us for the moment 
consider the origin of these many harms - what it is they 
arise from. Do they arise from loving and benefiting 
people? We must certainly say they do not. We must say 
they arise from hating and harming people. And if we were 
to distinguish and name those in the world who hate people 
and harm people, would it be “universal” or would it be 
“partial”? We must undoubtedly say it would be “partial”. 
This being so, is not this partiality (discrimination) among 
people really the source of the world’s great harms? This is 
why partiality (discrimination) is to be condemned.’ 

16.2 Master Mo said: ‘Those who condemn something 
must have the means of changing it. If they condemn 
something without having the means to change, it is like 
fighting water with water or fire with fire. Their theories 
will certainly be inadmissible.’ This is why Master Mo said: 
‘Universal is the means of changing partial.’ If this is the 
case, how can universal change partial? [He] said: ‘If people 
were to regard the states of others as they regard their own 
state, then who would still mobilize their own state to 
attack the states of others? They would regard the states of 
others as they regard their own state. If people were to 
regard the capital cities of others as they regard their own 



capital city, then who would still mobilize their own city to 
strike at the capital cities of others? Urey would regard the 
capital cities of others as they regard their own city. If 
people were to regard the households of others as they 
regard their own household, who would still stir their own 
household to bring disorder to the households of others? 
Urey would regard the households of others as they regard 
their own household. Now if states and cities did not attack 
and strike at each other, and if people’s households did not 
bring disorder to and damage each other, would this be 
harmful to the world? Or would it be beneficial to the 
world? This must be said to be beneficial to the world. For 
the moment let us think about the origin of these many 
benefits - what it is they arise from. And what is this from 
which they arise? Do they arise from hating and harming 
people? We must certainly say they do not. We must say 
they arise from loving and benefiting people. And if we 
were to distinguish and name those in the world who love 
people and benefit people, would it be “partial” or 
“universal”? We must certainly say it would be “universal”. 
In this case, then, it is “mutual and universal” which give 
rise to the world’s great benefits.’ 

16.3 This was wiry Master Mo said: ‘Universal is right. 
Moreover, as I originally said, the business of the ren man 



must be to seek diligently to promote the world’s benefits 
and eliminate the world’s harms. Now I [have established] 
what universal gives rise to - it is the world’s great 
benefits. And I [have established] what partial gives rise to 
- it is the world’s great harms.’ It is for this reason that 
Master Mo saying ‘partial is wrong and universal is right’ 
comes from this principle. 

16.4 Now if we are seeking to promote the world’s benefits 
and eliminate the world’s harms, we shall choose universal 
as being right. As a result, [people] will use their sharp 
hearing and keen sight to help each other in seeing and 
hearing; they will use their strong and powerful limbs to 
help each other in acting; and they will use their words to 
further teaching and instruction. As a result, those without 
wives and children will have the means of support and 
nourishment throughout their old age, and those who are 
young and weak, or alone without a father or mother, will 
have the means of help and support while they grow into 
adulthood. Now if universal is taken as being right, these 
are the benefits. I do not know what possible reason 
officers of the world could have for opposing universal 
when they all hear about it. 



16.5 Nevertheless, the arguments of the officers of the 
world who condemn universal never stop. Urey say: 
‘[Universal] may be good, but how can it be put to use?’ 
Master Mo said: ‘If it could not be put to use, even 
someone such as myself would also condemn it. Moreover, 
how can there be something that is good but can’t be used? 
Let us for the moment approach [the matter] from two 
sides. Suppose we consider two officers. Let one of them 
hold to partial and the other one hold to universal. In the 
first case, the officer holding to partial would say: “How 
can I regard the person of my friend as I regard my own 
person, or regard my friend’s parents as I regard my own 
parents?” Therefore, if he were to turn his attention to his 
friend, should he find him hungry, he would not feed him; 
should he find him cold, he would not clothe him; should 
he find him sick and ailing, he would not tend to him; and if 
he died, he would not bury him. Tire partial officer’s words 
are like this and his actions are too. Tire universal officer’s 
words are not like this and neither are his actions. He 
would say: “I have heard that one who aspires to high office 
in the world must regard the person of his friend as he 
regards his own person and he must regard his friend’s 
parents as he regards his own parents. Only then can he be 
considered a high officer in the world.” For this reason, if 
he were to turn his attention to his friend, should he find 



him hungry, he would feed him; should he find him cold, he 
would clothe him; should he find him sick and ailing, he 
would tend to him; and if he died, he would bury him. The 
universal officer’s words are like this and his actions are 
too. 

16.6 ‘Are two such officers mutually contradictory in their 
words and mutually opposing in their actions? Let us 
suppose there were two such officers and their words were 
certainly trustworthy and their actions certainly came to 
fruition, and that their words and actions corresponded like 
the two halves of a tally. Urey would not say something 
they would not do. In such a case, let us pose this question. 
Suppose now there was an open plain, broad and 
uncultivated, where someone was donning his armour and 
fastening his helmet, about to go into battle, and whether he 
would live or die could not be known. Or suppose that a 
ruler or great officer was sending him to a distant place 
such as Ba, Yuc, Qi or Jing, and whether he would return or 
not could not be known. Tire question then is, to whom 
would he entrust the protection of his house and family, the 
support of his parents and the care of his wife and children? 
Do we not know whether it would be to someone who held 
universal to be right or someone who held partial to be 
right? I think that under such circumstances, the men and 



women of the world would not be foolish. Although they 
might condemn [the views of] the universal person, they 
would certainly entrust these matters to someone who took 
universal to be right. In their words, they might reject 
universal, but in their choice they would select universal, 
which is a case of words and actions being opposed. We 
don’t know wiry it is that the world’s officers all hear about 
universal and yet condemn it. What can their reasons be?’ 

16.7 Nonetheless, the arguments of the officers of the 
world who condemn universal never stop. Urey say: ‘Is it 
permissible as a way of selecting officers, but not 
permissible as a way of selecting rulers?’ 

[Master Mo said:] ‘Let us approach [the matter] from 
two sides for a moment. Suppose there were two rulers and 
suppose one of them held to universal and the other to 
partial. In this case, the words of the partial ruler would be: 
“How can I regard the persons of my ten thousand people as 
I regard my own person? This is absolutely contrary to the 
feelings of [everyone in] the world. Aperson’s life on earth 
is very brief. It is like a galloping horse passing a crack.” 
Therefore, if he were to turn his attention to his ten 
thousand people, should he find them hungry, he would not 
feed them; should he find them cold, he would not clothe 
them; should he find them sick and ailing, he would not 



tend to them; and if they died, he would not bury them. The 
partial ruler’s words would be like this and his actions 
would be too. The universal ruler’s words would not be like 
this and neither would his actions. He would say: “I have 
heard that one who aspires to be an enlightened ruler in the 
world must give priority to the persons of the ten thousand 
people and put his own person second. Then he can be 
considered an enlightened ruler in the world.” Therefore, if 
he were to turn his attention to his ten thousand people, 
should he find them hungry, he would feed them; should he 
find them cold, he would clothe them; should he find them 
sick and ailing, he would tend to them; and if they died, he 
would bury them. Tire universal ruler’s words would be like 
this and his actions would be too. 

16.8 ‘Are two such rulers mutually contradictory in their 
words and mutually opposing in their actions? Let us 
suppose they were two rulers whose words were certainly 
trustworthy and whose actions certainly came to fruition, 
their words and actions corresponding like the two halves 
of a tally. Urey would not say something they would not do. 
In such a case, let us pose this question. Suppose now the 
year was one of plague and pestilence, and among the ten 
thousand people there were many who suffered cold and 
hunger so the number left for dead in channels and ditches 



was already very considerable. Do we not know, if there 
were to be a choice between these two rulers, which one 
would be followed? I think under these circumstances, the 
men and women of the world would not be foolish. 
Although [people] might condemn universal, they would 
certainly follow the universal ruler as right. In their words 
they might reject universal, but in choosing they would 
select universal, which is a case of words and actions being 
opposed. We don’t know why it is that the world’s officers 
all hear about universal and yet condemn it. What can their 
reasons be?’ 

16.9 Nonetheless, the arguments of officers of the world 
who condemn universal never stop. They say: ‘Universal 
might be ren and it might bey/ (righteous and just), but how 
can it be put into practice? We compare the impossibility 
of practising universal to picking up Mount Tai and leaping 
across the Yangtse and Yellow Rivers with it. Therefore, 
universal is no more than a wish. How is it something that 
can be put into practice?’ Master Mo said: ‘Picking up 
Mount Tai and leaping across the Yangtse and Yellow Rivers 
with it is something no one has ever done, from ancient 
times to the present, from when people first came into 
existence. Now in the case of universal mutual love and 
exchange of mutual benefit, this comes from the first four 



sage kings personally practising it.’ How do we know that 
the first four sage kings personally practised it? Master Mo 
said: ‘I myself did not live at the same time as they did, so I 
did not personally hear their voices or see their faces. It is 
through what they wrote on bamboo and silk, what they 
carved in metal and stone, what they engraved on 
[ceremonial] plates and bowls to hand down to their 
descendants of later generations that I know this. Tire 
“Great Oath” says: “King Wen was like the sun and the 
moon, creating light and bringing its brightness to the four 
regions and the western lands.” This speaks of the wide 
extent and greatness of King Wen’s universal love for the 
world being like the sun and moon which universally 
illumine all parts of the world without partiality.’ This was 
King Wen’s universal and is what Master Mo means when 
he speaks of universal, taking King Wen as his model. 

16.10 ‘Moreover, it is not only the “Great Oath” that is so. 
Tire “Oath of Yu” is also like this. Yu said: “People 
everywhere, I ask you to listen to my words. It is not that I, 
one small person, dare to stir up this warlike activity. It is 
due to the foolishness of the You Miao that I am 
implementing Heaven’s punishment. So I am leading the 
hosts of the feudal lords and princes to bring the You Miao 
to submission.” Yu’s bringing the You Miao to submission 



was not because he sought to increase his wealth and 
nobility, or because he sought happiness and prosperity, or 
to bring pleasure to his ears and eyes. It was because he 
sought to promote the world’s benefits and eliminate the 
world’s harms.’ This was Yu’s universal and is what Master 
Mo means when he speaks of universal, taking Yu as his 
model. 

16.11 ‘Moreover, it is not only the “Oath of Yu” that is so. 
The “Speech of Tang” is also like this. Tang said: “I, the 
unworthy Lii, dared to use a dark-coloured male animal to 
inform the Supreme Lord and the spirits of the earth, 
saying: ‘Now Heaven [Iras sent] a great drought and it is 
right that I, Lii, bear the responsibility. I do not know if I 
have committed a wrong against [the powers] above and 
below. Where there is good, I dare not conceal it. Where 
there is wrongdoing, I dare not pardon it. This is something 
that is clearly understood by the mind of the Supreme 
Being. If anywhere in the ten thousand regions there is 
wrongdoing, it is right that I take the responsibility. If I 
myself do wrong, it need not involve the ten thousand 
regions.’” This, then, tells of Tang’s ennoblement as Son of 
Heaven and his enrichment in possessing all under Heaven. 
Nevertheless, he did not shrink from offering himself as 
the victim to be used as a sacrifice to persuade the 



Supreme Being and the ghosts and spirits.’ This was Tang’s 
universal and is what Master Mo means when he speaks of 
universal, taking Tang as his model. 

16.12 ‘Moreover, it is not only the “Oath of Fate” and the 
“Speech of Tang” that are so. The “Odes of Zhou” is also 
like this. The “Odes of Zhou” states: ‘The King’s path is 
broad and expansive. It is not inclined; it is not partial. The 
King’s path is level and fair. It is not partial; it is not 
inclined. Its straightness is like an arrow, its smoothness is 
like a whetstone. It is what the noble man walks upon. It is 
what the lesser man looks at.” 1 It is words such as these 
that speak of the principle [of universality]. In ancient 
times, when Wen and Wu conducted govermnent, with just 
division they rewarded worthiness and punished evil, 
showing no partiality to parents or younger and older 
brothers.’ This was Wen and Wu’s universal and is what 
Master Mo means when he speaks of universal, taking Wen 
and Wu as his models. We don’t know why it is that the 
world’s officers all hear about universal and yet condemn 
it. What can their reasons be? 

16.13 Nonetheless, the arguments of officers of the world 
who condemn universal never stop. They say: ‘Could it be 
that not being in accord with the benefit of one’s parents is 


harmful to being filial?’ Master Mo said: ‘For the moment 
let us examine the question of consideration for one’s 
parents being the basis for a filial son. Do we not know 
whether in the case of consideration for parents being [the 
basis for] a filial son, he would also wish others to love and 
benefit his parents? Or would he wish others to hate and 
harm his parents? Looking at it from basic principles, he 
would wish others to love and benefit his parents. In this 
case then, what would I give priority in day-to-day business 
in order to attain this? If I were to give priority in day-to- 
day business to loving and benefiting the parents of others, 
would others subsequently requite me by loving and 
benefiting my parents? Or if I were to give priority in day- 
to-day business to hating and harming the parents of others, 
would others subsequently requite me by loving and 
benefiting my parents? Most certainly, if I were to give 
priority in day-to-day business to loving and benefiting the 
parents of others, others would subsequently requite me by 
loving and benefiting my parents. This being the case then, 
in the interchange between filial sons is there in fact any 
alternative to giving priority in day-to-day business to 
loving and benefiting the parents of others? Or are we to 
regard the filial sons of the world as foolish and not up to 
accepting this as good? If, for a moment, we take as a basis 
what the former kings wrote, in the words of the “Greater 



Elegies”, it is said: “No words are without response, no 
virtue is without reward. If you present me with a peach, I 
shall repay you with a plum.” 2 This says that whoever loves 
others must themselves be loved, and whoever hates others 
must themselves be hated. We don’t know why it is that the 
world’s officers all hear about universal and yet condemn 
it. What can their reasons be? Do they think it is difficult 
or impossible to put into practice? But there have already 
been things as difficult as this that were able to be put into 
practice. 

16.14 ‘Formerly, King Ling of Jing loved slender waists. 
During the time of King Ling, the officers of Jing did not 
eat more than one meal a day. As a result, they had to rely 
on a stick to get up and used the support of walls when 
walking. Now restricting one’s food is a difficult thing to 
do, but they did it because it pleased King Ling. So it 
doesn’t need more than a single generation for people to be 
able to change, if they seek to fall in with the wishes of 
their superiors. Formerly, the The king, Gou Jian, loved 
courage. He instructed his officers and ministers [in it] for 
three years, but his knowledge was not yet sufficient to 
know [the outcome of the instruction]. So he set fire to a 
boat and beat the drum to signal the advance. As those in 
front fell so those behind took their positions and the 


number who succumbed to water and fire could not be 
counted. At that time, if he had not sounded the drum for 
retreat, one could say that the officers of Yiie would all 
have perished. Sacrificing oneself is a difficult thing to do, 
but after they did it, the Yiie king was delighted. So it 
doesn’t need more than a single generation for people to be 
able to change, if they seek to fall in with the wishes of 
their superiors. Formerly, Duke Wen of Jin liked coarse 
clothing. In Duke Wen’s time, the officers of Jin wore 
clothes of coarse cloth, furs of sheepskin, hats of rough 
silk and shoes of coarse canvas. [Thus attired,] they went in 
to see Duke Wen and went out to walk in the court. Wearing 
coarse clothing is a difficult thing to do, but after they did 
it, Duke Wen was delighted. So it doesn’t need more than a 
single generation for people to be able to change, if they 
seek to fall in with the wishes of their superiors. Now 
eating very little, entering the burning boat and wearing 
coarse clothing are among the most difficult things in the 
world to do, but after they were done the ruler was 
delighted, indicating that it doesn’t need more than a single 
generation for people to be able to change. What is the 
reason for this? It is that they seek to conform to the 
pattern of their superiors. Now things like universal mutual 
love and the exchange of mutual benefit are both beneficial 
and easy to practise in very many ways. I think it is only a 



matter of not having a ruler who delights in them and that is 
all. If there was a ruler who delighted in these things, 
encouraged people with rewards and praise, and intimidated 
them with penalties and punishments, I think the people 
would take to universal mutual love and exchange of mutual 
benefit, just like fire goes up and water goes down and 
cannot be stopped in the world.’ 

16.15 Therefore, universal was the Way of the sage kings. It 
was the means whereby kings, dukes and great officers 
brought peace, and the ten thousand people had enough 
clothing and food. So for the noble man, there is nothing 
equal to carefully examining universal and assiduously 
practising it. It inevitably makes rulers kind, it inevitably 
makes ministers loyal, it inevitably makes fathers 
compassionate, it inevitably makes sons filial, it inevitably 
makes older brothers well disposed and it inevitably makes 
younger brothers respectful. And for a noble man, there is 
nothing equal to wishing to be a kind ruler, or a loyal 
minister, or a compassionate father, or a filial son, or a 
well-disposed older brother, or a respectful younger 
brother, so it is right that universal cannot but be put into 
practice. This was the Way of the sage kings; it was of great 
benefit to the ten thousand people. 



17 


Condemning Offensive Warfare I 
(Fei Gong Shang ) 


17.1 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘In ancient times, kings, 
dukes and great officers, if they genuinely desired success 
and abhorred failure, if they wished for peace and disliked 
danger, could not do otherwise than condemn offensive 
warfare. 1 Now if there is one man who enters another’s 
orchard or garden and steals his peaches and plums, all who 
hear about it condemn him. If those above who conduct 
government get hold of him, they punish him. Why is this? 
Because it is by harming another that he benefits himself. 
When it comes to stealing another’s dogs, hogs, chickens 
and suckling pigs, his not -yi (wrong and unjust) action is 
greater than entering another’s orchard or garden and 
stealing his peaches and plums. What is the reason for this? 
Because his harming the other is much greater, his lack of 


ren (love, kindness, humanity and benevolence) and yi 
(right action, righteousness and justice) is even greater and 
his crime more serious. When it comes to entering 
another’s animal enclosure and taking his horses and oxen, 
his lack of ren and yi is even greater than stealing another’s 
dogs, hogs, chickens and suckling pigs. What is the reason 
for this? It is because the harm to the other is greater still. 
If the harm to the other is greater still, the lack of ren and 
yi is even greater and the crime more serious. When it 
comes to killing an innocent man, seizing his clothes and 
fur garments, and taking his spear and sword, the lack of yi 
is even greater than entering another’s animal enclosure 
and taking his horses and oxen. What is the reason for this? 
It is because the loss to the other is greater still. If the loss 
to the other is even greater, then the lack of ren [and yi] is 
even greater and the crime more serious. If this is valid, the 
noble men of the world should all know and condemn it, 
and call it not yi. Now, when it comes to what is a great lack 
of yi, that is, attacking states, they don’t recognize and 
condemn it; instead, they commend it and say it is yi (right 
and just). Can this be called knowing the difference 
between what is yi and what is not yil 

17.2 ‘The killing of one person is spoken of as not yi 
(wrong and unjust) and certainly constitutes one capital 



offence. Reasoning on this basis, killing ten people is ten 
times as not yi, so certainly constitutes ten capital 
offences. Killing a hundred people is a hundred times as 
not yi, so certainly constitutes a hundred capital offences. 

If this is valid, the noble men of the world should all know 
and condemn it, and call it not yi. But when it comes to 
what is a great lack of yi, that is, attacking states, they don’t 
recognize and condemn it. On the contrary, they praise it 
and call it yi (right and just). They really didn’t know this 
was not yi and therefore recorded their words to hand on to 
later generations. If they knew it was not yi, how do we 
explain their recording what was not yi in order to hand it 
on to later generations? 

17.3 ‘Now suppose there was someone, who when he saw a 
little bit of black, called it black, but when he saw a lot of 
black, called it white. We would certainly take this person 
to be someone who did not know the difference between 
white and black. [Likewise,] suppose there was someone, 
who when he tasted a little bitterness, called it bitter, but 
when he tasted a lot of bitterness, called it sweet. We would 
certainly take this person to be someone who did not know 
the difference between sweet and bitter. Now when there is 
a small wrongdoing, people recognize and condemn it. 
When there is a great wrongdoing, like attacking states, 



they don’t recognize and condemn [it]; instead they go 
along with it and praise it, calling it yi (right and just). Can 
this be spoken of as knowing the difference between what 
is yi and what is not yi (wrong and unjust)? This is how we 
know that the noble men of the world are confused about 
the distinction between what is yi and what is not yi.’ 



18 


Condemning Offensive Warfare II 
(Fei Gong Zhong ) 


18.1 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘In ancient times, kings, 
dukes and great officers, in conducting government in their 
states, genuinely wished to be careful with regard to 
censure and praise, to be just in rewards and punishments 
and not to fail injudicial and administrative matters. 
Therefore, rightly, offensive warfare was something they 
could not pursue. Nowadays, if troops are mobilized and 
they go forth in winter, there is fear of cold, and if they go 
forth in summer, there is fear of heat - so they cannot be 
sent forth in either winter or summer. If they go forth in 
spring, it disrupts the people’s planting and sowing and the 
cultivation of trees, and if they go forth in autumn, it 
disrupts the people’s reaping and storing. Now as there is 
no one season without disruption, the ordinary people who 



die from hunger and cold cannot be counted. And if you try 
to calculate how much of the equipment - bamboo arrows, 
flags and banners, tents, and other things which an army 
sets out with - is lost or destroyed and doesn’t return, this 
also is beyond computation. Moreover, the spears, lances, 
halberds, swords and war chariots the army goes forthwith 
which are destroyed, broken and lost, and don’t return also 
cannot be numbered. Further, of the oxen and horses that 
are fat when they go forth, those that are lean when they 
return, or those that die and are lost and don’t return, 
cannot be counted. And, in addition, because the road is 
long and food supplies are cut off without means of relief, 
the ordinary people who die cannot be counted. And 
because the places where they dwell cannot be made 
peaceful, they don’t eat and drink at proper times, satiety 
and starvation cannot be controlled, and the ordinary people 
who become sick and die on the roads cannot be counted. 
Either the soldiers who are lost will be very many, or the 
whole army will be lost; in both cases, the losses cannot be 
counted. Then ghosts and spirits will lose those 
descendants who can carry out the sacrifices, which is 
another incalculable loss.’ 

18.2 [When the rulers of] states start wars, they deprive the 
people of their livelihoods and strip them of benefits to a 



very great extent. Why do they do this? They say: ‘We covet 
the fame of conquest and wish to reap the benefits. That is 
why we do it.’ Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘If you determine 
what they gain from victory, it isn’t something that can be 
of use. If you calculate what they gain, it isn’t nearly as 
much as they lose. Now if you could attack a city with an 
inner wall of three li and an outer wall of seven li without 
using sharp weapons and without anyone being killed, there 
would be no problem. But this is not the case. The number 
of people killed will range from ten thousand at the most to 
one thousand at the least before a city with an inner wall of 
three li and an outer wall of seven li can be taken. Now in a 
state of ten thousand chariots, there is a large amount of 
waste land that can be occupied and vast open spaces that 
can be opened up, all without conquest. It is, then, a case of 
too much land, but not enough officers and people. Now to 
send officers and men to their deaths and to add to the 
misfortunes of those above and below in order to attack an 
empty city is to cast away what there is not enough of to 
gain what there is already an excess of. To govern like this 
is contrary to the basic interests of the state.’ 

18.3 Those who argue in favour of offensive warfare say: 
‘To the south, there are the kings of Jing and Wu. 1 To the 
north, there are the princes of Qi and Jin. At the time of the 


world when these rulers were first established, the size of 
their lands did not reach several hundred li, and the number 
of their people did not reach several hundred thousand. By 
means of offensive warfare their lands have been extended 
to several thousand li and their people now number several 
millions. That this validates offensive warfare cannot be 
denied.’ Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘Although four or five 
states may have benefited by this means, I still say that this 
is not the right way. For example, a doctor treats those who 
are sick with medicines. Now suppose there was this 
doctor who so unified his treatment that he gave the same 
medicine to all the sick people of the world and ten 
thousand people took it, but only four or five got any 
benefit. We would say it was not a good medicine. 
Therefore, a filial son would not give it to his parents and a 
loyal minister would not give it to his ruler.’ 

18.4 In ancient times, states were established in the world. 
The number of these that were lost through offensive 
warfare cannot be counted. Those in the distant past we 
hear about. Those more recently we see for ourselves. How 
do I know this is so? In the east, there was Ju 2 which was a 
very small state squeezed in between large states. It did not 
show due deference to the large states and they, in turn, did 
not foster it or wish to benefit it. So from the east, the 


people of Yue encroached upon it and seized territory, 
while from the west, the people of Qi annexed and 
incorporated it. If we drink about why Ju was destroyed 
between Qi and Yue, it was due to offensive warfare. Even 
the destruction of Chen and Cai in the south, situated as 
they were between Wu and Yue, was also due to offensive 
warfare. So too was the destruction of Zu 3 and Butuhe 
between Yan, Dai, Hu and Mo in the north.’ Therefore 
Master Mo said: ‘The ancients had this saying: “If you plan 
and are unsuccessful, then use the past to predict the future, 
and use the manifest to know the hidden.” If you plan like 
this, you can succeed and know.’ 

18.5 The advocates of offensive warfare say: ‘Others may 
not be able to gather and utilize the great mass of their 
people for the purpose of destruction. We, however, are 
able to gather and utilize the great mass of our people and 
employ them in offensive warfare in the world, so who 
would dare not to submit to us?’ 

Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘Although you may be able to 
gather and utilize the great mass of your people, how can 
you compare with Held 4 of Wu in ancient times? He trained 
his troops for seven years so that wearing armour and 
carrying weapons, they could travel fast for 300 li before 
resting. When stationed at Zhulin, they came forth on to the 


track at Mingai and engaged [the Chu forces] at Boju. 5 
[Held] took control of Chu and forced Song and Lu to 
come to his court and offer tribute. When it came to Fu 
Chai himself, he attacked Qi to the north. Positioning his 
troops above Wen, he joined battle at Ailing 6 and inflicted a 
crushing defeat on the people of Qi, forcing them to retreat 
to Mount Tai. To the east, he attacked 'Yue, crossing the 
three rivers and the five lakes, and compelling [the Yue 
forces] to take refuge at Guiji. None of the kingdoms of 
the “nine tribes” (eastern barbarians) did not submit. When 
he returned, he was unable to reward those bereaved or to 
bestow charity on the people. He took advantage of his own 
strength, boasted about Iris achievements and flaunted his 
own brilliance but neglected to train [his troops]. 
Subsequently, he built a tower at Gusu which was still not 
complete after seven years. By this time, there was 
disaffection and weariness in the hearts of the people of 
Wu. The King of Yue, Gou Jian, saw the dissension and 
discord between superiors and inferiors in Wu, so he 
assembled his forces to take revenge on his enemy. 
Entering through the outer wall to the north, he seized the 
great boat and surrounded the royal palace, and so the state 
of Wu was lost. 


18.6 ‘In former times, Jin had six generals, none of whom 
was as strong as Zhi Bo. 7 Reckoning on the great extent of 
his lands and the large number of his people, he wished to 
oppose the feudal lords in order to glorify his name. So he 
selected his bravest soldiers and organized all his boats and 
chariots in great numbers to attack Zhonghang and possess 
his [lands]. Thinking his plans were sufficient, he also 
attacked the Fan house and completely defeated it. Thus he 
combined the three houses into one. Still he did not stop, 
but surrounded Zhao Xiangzi at Jinyang. When this 
happened, Han and Wei got together to plan, saying: ‘There 
is an old adage which says, ‘When the lips are lost the teeth 
become cold.’ If the house of Zhao is destroyed in the 
morning, we will follow it in the evening. If the Zhao 
family is killed in the evening, we will follow it in the 
morning. The Odes says: ‘If a fish cannot move swiftly in 
water, how will it manage on dry land?’” 8 Therefore, the 
three rulers worked together with singleness of purpose, 
opening gates and clearing roads, donning armour and 
raising officers. So, with Han and Wei acting from without 
and the Zhao house acting from within, they struck at Zhi 
Bo and completely defeated him.’ 

18.7 This is why Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘In ancient 
times, there was the saying: ‘The noble man doesn’t seek 


his reflection in water but in the people. From a reflection 
in water he sees only his face; from a reflection in the 
people he can know good fortune and bad fortune.” 9 
Nowadays, if there are those who take offensive war to be 
beneficial, should they not examine this in the mirror of 
Zhi Bo’s affairs? It can easily be recognized that this is not 
auspicious but inauspicious.’ 


19 


Condemning Offensive Warfare III 
(Fei GongXia ) 


19.1 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘Nowadays, in the world, 
what should be praised as yi (right action, righteousness 
and justice)? Should it be that if someone acts in accord 
with what benefits Heaven above, ghosts in the middle 
realm and the people below, he should be praised? Or 
should it be that if someone does not act in accord with 
what benefits Heaven above, ghosts in the middle realm and 
the people below, he should be praised? Even the most 
foolish of men would have to say: “It ought to be that, if 
someone acts in accord with what benefits Heaven above, 
ghosts in the middle realm and the people below, he should 
be praised!” Nowadays, everyone in the world agrees t hat yi 
was the method of the sage kings. But, in fact, nowadays, 
the many feudal lords of the world all violently attack and 



invade each other to an equal degree, which is to praise yi 
as a word without considering what it actually is. This is 
like a blind person using the terms “white” and “black” as 
other people do, but not being able to distinguish what they 
actually are. How can this be called “distinguishing”? 

19.2 ‘This is wiry, in ancient times, those who were wise, 
when planning for the world, necessarily gave careful 
consideration to yi and afterwards put it into practice. In 
this way, their actions were without doubt and quickly came 
to completion. They attained their desires, and yet still 
complied with what benefited Heaven, ghosts and ordinary 
people. This, then, was the Way of those who were wise. 
Therefore, those men who were ren (loving, kind, humane 
and benevolent), and who ruled the world in ancient times, 
certainly opposed the great states’ policy (of aggressive 
war). They unified the world as an harmonious whole, and 
brought together all within the four seas. Thus they led the 
ordinary people of the world to pursue their affairs and, in 
doing so, to serve the Supreme Lord, the ghosts and spirits 
of the mountains and rivers. Tire people they benefited 
were many and their achievement was, as a consequence, 
great. This was why Heaven rewarded them, ghosts enriched 
them and people praised them. So they were honoured as 
Sons of Heaven, they were enriched with all under Heaven 



and their fame was established in Heaven and on earth and 
has continued undimmed to the present day. This, then, was 
the Way of wise men and the means by which the former 
kings came to possess the world. 

19.3 ‘Nowadays, kings, dukes, great officers and feudal 
lords of the world are not like this. They will all, without 
exception, choose their bravest and fiercest soldiers, 
arrange and deploy their boats and chariots, and prepare 
their strongest armour and sharpest weapons to attack and 
reduce states that are without fault. When they enter the 
border regions of a state, they cut down its grain crops, fell 
its trees and forests, break down its inner and outer city 
walls, fill in its ditches and pools, seize and kill its 
sacrificial animals, burn down its ancestral temples, 
slaughter its people, destroy the old and weak and take away 
its valuable utensils. Advancing rapidly and fighting to the 
limit, they say: “Tire highest [honour] is to die in battle; the 
next highest is to kill many of the enemy; the least is to 
suffer injury oneself. Further, to break ranks and scatter in 
defeat is a crime punishable by death without possible 
pardon.” These are words to instil fear into the masses. To 
annex a state and overthrow its army, and to plunder and 
oppress its people, is away of bringing disorder to the 
work of the sages. How can this be construed as benefiting 



Heaven? In fact, to take the people of Heaven and use them 
to attack the cities of Heaven is to kill the people of 
Heaven, destroy the standing of the spirits, overturn the 
altars of soil and grain, and seize and slaughter the 
sacrificial animals. Hris, then, does not accord with 
Heaven’s benefit in the upper realm. How can this be 
construed as benefiting ghosts? To kill the people of 
Heaven, exterminate those who honour ghosts and spirits, 
cast aside the former kings, plunder and oppress the ten 
thousand people, and scatter and disperse the general 
populace does not accord with ghosts’ benefit in the middle 
realm. How can this be construed as benefiting the people? 
If you kill the people of Heaven to benefit people, the 
benefit is meagre indeed. Moreover, if you consider the 
resources wasted in military activity, this harms the very 
foundations of people’s lives. Tire depletion of the 
resources of the world and the ordinary people is 
incalculable, so this does not achieve benefit for the people 
below. 

19.4 ‘Nowadays, when armies consider what is not of 
benefit, they list the following: a general who is not brave, 
knights who are not determined, weapons that are not sharp, 
training that is inadequate, a force that is not substantial, 
soldiers that are not harmonious, ill-treatment that is not 



resisted, a siege that is not sustained, a conflict that is not 
swift and a force without strong cohesion. Furthermore, if 
resolve is not firm, the feudal lords of allied states will 
start to waver and, if this is the case, it will give rise to 
enemy plans and weaken the determination of [the attacking 
forces]. If all these adverse factors exist, and yet the state 
still goes ahead [with an attack], it will lose its soldiers and 
the ordinary people will lose their livelihoods. Now why 
not look at this from the viewpoint of a state that favours 
attacking and reducing? Even if it is to launch a campaign 
on a moderate scale, the worthy men must number several 
hundred, the sons of officials must number several 
thousand and the ordinary foot soldiers must number 
several tens of thousands. Then there is enough for an army 
to go forth. Aprotracted campaign lasts several years, a 
swift campaign lasts several months. In either case, 
superiors don’t have time to attend to government, officers 
don’t have time for their official duties, farmers don’t have 
time to sow and harvest, and women don’t have time to spin 
and weave, so the state loses soldiers and the ordinary 
people lose their livelihoods. Furthermore, if you also 
weigh up the wear and tear and destruction of horses and 
carts, and the materials for the army’s tents, and what the 
army uses in terms of arms and weapons, if one part in five 
remains, it is a lot. And not only this; consider too those 



who are scattered or lost on the road, because the road is 
long and supplies are not maintained. They don’t eat or 
drink at the proper times; consequently, the men who 
become ill through hunger and cold and are rolled into 
ditches and gullies to die cannot be counted. This is not of 
benefit to the people and the harm to the world is 
substantial. Yet kings, dukes and great officers still favour 
it and do it. This is to favour injuring and destroying the ten 
thousand people of the world. How is this not perverse? At 
the present time, the states in the world that love warfare 
are Qi, Jin, Chu and Yue. If these four states were to realize 
their ambitions within the world, they would all increase 
the people of their states tenfold and still [their people] 
would not be able to eat what the land produced. This is a 
case of there being not enough people and too much land. 
Now they still contend for the sake of land, opposing and 
harming each other. This, then, is to neglect what there isn’t 
enough of and give importance to what there is excess of.’ 

19.5 Nowadays, those rulers who favour offensive warfare 
also embellish their arguments in order to refute Master 
Mo by saying: ‘Do you take offensive warfare to be not yi 
and not to be beneficial in affairs? In former times, Yu 
reduced the You Miao, 1 Tang overthrew Jie and King Wu 


overthrew Zhou, and yet they are all established as being 
sage kings. How do you account for this?’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘You have not examined the class of 
words I have used nor have you understood the reasoning 
behind them. What they did is not called “attack”, it is 
called “punishment”, hr former times, the San Miao were in 
great disorder and Heaven decreed their destruction. The 
sun was strange and came forth at night. For three days it 
rained blood. Dragons appeared in the temples. Dogs cried 
in the marketplaces. There was ice during summer and the 
earth cracked so that springs welled up. The five grains 
underwent change and the people were greatly alarmed. 
Heaven issued its decree to Yii at the Xuan Palace 2 and 'Yii 
himself took hold of Heaven’s imperial tablet in order to 
attack the You Miao. Thunder and lightning suddenly 
appeared, and a spirit with the face of a man and the body of 
a bird took hold of an arrow and, with great deliberation, 
shot the Miao general. Tire Miao army was thrown into 
great confusion and not long after that the Miao people 
were in decline. Then Yu separated the mountains and 
rivers, divided things into high and low, received and 
brought under control the four regions and ensured 
harmony between mankind and the spirits. Then the world 
was at peace. This was why Yu reduced the You Miao. 


19.6 ‘When it came to the Xia king, Jie, Heaven issued a 
stern decree. The sun and moon did not rise or set at the 
right times, cold and heat were disordered to an extreme 
degree, the five grains were scorched and died, ghosts 
called out in the country and cranes cried unceasingly for 
more than ten nights. Heaven then gave its command to 
Tang at the Biao Palace: “\bu must receive the great decree 
of Xia. The virtue of Xia is in severe disorder and I have 
already withdrawn its mandate from Heaven, so to punish 
them I must send you to subdue them.” Tang then dared to 
lead forth his forces and attack the regions of Xia. The 
Supreme Ruler sent a spirit under cover of darkness to 
destroy the cities of Xia, and after a short time the spirit 
came to inform [Tang], saying: ‘The virtue of Xia is in 
severe disorder, so go and attack them. I must send you to 
subdue them. I have already received the decree from 
Heaven and Heaven has ordered that [Zhu] Rong 3 bring 
down fire on the north-west corner of the Xia capital.” Tang 
then led Jie’s masses to subdue Xia and gathered the feudal 
lords at Bo to make clear Heaven’s decree and promulgate 
it to the four regions. And among the feudal lords of the 
world, there was none who dared not submit to him. This 
was how Tang punished Jie. 


19.7 ‘When it came to the Shang king, Zhou, Heaven did 
not approve of his morality. Sacrifices did not accord with 
the time. For ten nights in succession the sun shone and it 
rained earth at Bo. The nine tripods {ding) moved from 
their bases, strange women came forth at night, there were 
ghosts lamenting at night, there were women who became 
men, the heavens rained flesh, thorny brambles grew on the 
nation’s roads and the king himself became increasingly 
self-indulgent. Ared bird, holding in its beak the imperial 
jade, alighted on the Zhou altar at Qi Mountain and 
proclaimed that Heaven had ordered King Wen of Zhou to 
overthrow Ym and take possession of the state. Tai Dian 
came back, the Yellow River brought forth the chart and the 
land brought forth a strange yellow beast. 4 King Wu 
continued his achievement. In a dream, he saw three spirits 
who said: “We have already drowned Zhou of Ym in wine 
and food. Go and attack him. We will certainly see to it that 
you overcome him.” Wu then attacked the dissolute man, 
replaced Ym with Zhou, and Heaven gave King Wu the 
phoenix banner. After he had already completely subdued 
the Ym, he received the full mandate as Son of Heaven. He 
divided the responsibilities for sacrifices to the gods 
among the feudal lords and (himself) made sacrifice to 
Zhou’s first king (Cheng Tang). He gave notice of this to 
the four regions so within the world there was no one who 


did not submit. Thus he became the successor to the line of 
Tang. This was King Wu’s way of punishing Zhou so, if it is 
considered from the point of view of the three sage kings, 
it is not what is called “attack”. It is what is called 
“punishment”.’ 

19.8 Then those rulers who favour attacking and reducing 
(other states) also embellish their arguments to refute 
Master Mo, asking: ‘Do you take attacking and reducing to 
be not yi (wrong and unjust) and not beneficial in affairs? In 
former times, Xiong Li of Chu was first enfeoffed with the 
region between the Sui Mountains. The Yue king, Yi Kui, 
came out from Youju and first founded a country at Yue. 
Tang Shu and Lii Shang 5 founded Qi and Jin (respectively). 
All these were initially regions of several hundred li. Now, 
by reason of their annexation of states, the four have 
divided all under Heaven and possess it. Why is this?’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘You have not examined the class of 
words I have used nor have you understood the reasoning 
behind them. In ancient times, when the Son of Heaven first 
enfeoffed the feudal lords, there were more than ten 
thousand of them. Now, because of the annexation of 
states, more than ten thousand states have all been 
destroyed and four states alone are established. This is like 


a doctor treating more than ten thousand people and curing 
only four. He could not, then, be called a good doctor.’ 

19.9 Then those rulers who favour attacking and reducing 
[other states] further elaborate their arguments, saying: ‘It 
is not that we consider our gold and jade, our sons and 
daughters and our fertile land to be insufficient. We wish to 
be established in the world through}'/ and find fame and we 
wish to attract the feudal lords through virtue.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘Now if there was someone who was 
able to establish himself in the world through}’/ and find 
fame and attract the feudal lords through virtue, the world’s 
submission would be immediate and expected. Tire world is 
as tired of the prolonged period of attacking and reducing 
as a young boy who has played at being a horse. Nowadays, 
if there were feudal lords in the world who were able to 
establish good faith in their dealings and gave primacy to 
benefiting their people, then, when a great state was without 
yi, they would join in grieving for it. When a great state 
attacked a small state, they would join in rescuing it. When 
the inner and outer city walls of a small state were 
incomplete, they would join in repairing them. If cloth and 
grain were deficient, they would supply them. If money was 
insufficient, they would provide it. If there was this kind of 
association with a great state, the ruler of the great state 



would be pleased. If there was this kind of association with 
a small state, the ruler of the small state would be pleased. 
If the other’s [forces] were weary and our [forces] were 
rested, our army would be stronger. If they were treated 
liberally and with kindness, and if what was not urgent 
replaced what was pressing, the people would certainly be 
compliant. If attack and reduction were replaced by good 
order in our state, the efficacy would certainly be 
multiplied. If we calculated the cost involved in raising an 
army to protect against the evils of the feudal lords, we 
could see that we would certainly be able to obtain 
substantial benefit (from avoidance of warfare). If we led 
the people along the right path, established a reputation for 
yi and invariably acted liberally towards our populace as 
well as training our forces in a trustworthy way, and 
supported the feudal lords like this, it would be possible to 
have no enemies in the world. This would be of incalculable 
benefit to the world. And since it would be [of such] benefit 
to the world, if kings, dukes and great officers don’t know 
and employ it, they may be spoken of as not knowing a 
fundamental component of benefiting the world.’ 

19.10 This is wiry Master Mo said: ‘At the present time, 
kings, dukes, great officers, officers and noble men of the 
world genuinely seek to further the world’s benefits and 



eliminate its harms, but still they frequently engage in 
offensive warfare. This is truly a great misfortune for the 
world. Now if they wish to be ren and yi and seek to be 
superior officers who accord with the Way of the sage 
kings above and with the benefit of the ordinary people 
below, then the theory of condemnation of offensive 
warfare is something they cannot avoid considering.’ 



20 


Moderation in Use I 
(.Jie Yong Shang ) 


20.1 When a sage governs a single state, that one state’s 
[benefits] can be doubled. On a larger scale, when [a sage] 
governs the world, the world’s [benefits] can be doubled. 
His doubling [of benefits] does not come through acquiring 
land beyond the borders, but by doing away with useless 
expenditure in his own state. This is enough to double 
[benefits]. A sage who governs, when he issues edicts and 
promotes affairs, when he employs the people and uses 
materials, does nothing that isn’t useful. For this reason, 
the use of resources is without waste, the people are not 
overburdened and the increase in benefit is considerable. 
Why does he make clothes and fur garments? To keep out 
the cold of winter and withstand the heat of summer. In 
general, the principle of making clothes is to provide 



warmth in winter and coolness in summer. What is merely 
decorative and doesn’t add to these objectives, he eschews. 
Why does he make dwellings and houses? To keep out the 
wind and cold of winter and withstand the heat and rain of 
summer, and to provide protection against thieves and 
robbers. What is merely ornamental and doesn’t add to 
these objectives, he eschews. Why does he make armour 
and shields and the five weapons? To withstand plunder and 
disorder due to thieves and robbers. If there is plunder and 
disorder due to thieves and robbers, those who have armour 
and shields and the five weapons can overcome them and 
those who don’t can’t. This is the reason a sage makes 
armour and shields and the five weapons. In general, in 
making armour and shields and the five weapons, it is 
beneficial to make them as light as possible, but they 
should be strong and hard to break. What is merely 
ornamental and doesn’t add to these objectives, he 
eschews. Why does he make boats and carts? Carts are 
made to travel over hills and level ground while boats are 
made to travel on rivers and waterways as ways of 
benefiting communication in the four directions. In 
general, in making boats and carts, it is beneficial to make 
them as light as possible. What is merely ornamental and 
doesn’t add to this, he eschews. Overall, in making these 
things, if something doesn’t add to use, it is not done. In 



this way there is no wastage in the use of materials, the 
people are not overburdened and the increase in benefit is 
considerable. 

20.2 Again, if the great officers’ love of accumulating 
pearls and jade, birds and animals, and dogs and horses is 
done away with in order to increase the numbers of clothes 
and garments, dwellings and houses, armour and shields, 
the five weapons, and boats and carts, the numbers can be 
doubled. If these are not difficult to double, what is it that 
is difficult to double? It is only the population that is 
difficult to double. Nevertheless, the population can be 
doubled. The sage kings of former times made a law 
stating: ‘When men are twenty years old, they must marry 
and have a family. When women are fifteen years old, they 
must take a husband.’ This was the law of the sage kings. 

But now the sage kings are no more, and the people have 
cast off restraint. Those who wish to get married and have a 
family early do so at twenty, while those who wish to get 
married and have a family late do so at forty. In this way, the 
number of those marrying early is reduced by the number 
of those marrying late and vice versa with the result that the 
average age is ten years older than that decreed by the law 
of the sage kings. If a child is born every three years, in this 
period there would be [the addition of] two or three people. 



So is it possible to double [the population] without making 
people marry and have a family early? It is not. 

20.3 Nowadays, those who conduct government in the 
world have many ways of reducing the population. Urey 
cause the people to be burdened with labour, the taxes 
imposed are heavy and materials for the people are 
insufficient, so that those dying of cold and hunger cannot 
be counted. Moreover, great officers raise armies to attack 
neighbouring states. Long campaigns last a whole year and 
short campaigns last several months, so for long periods 
men and women don’t see each other. In this way the 
population is reduced. Those who are made sick by 
unsettled living conditions and irregular intake of food and 
drink, as well as those who are ambushed or injured in 
attacks by fire, or killed in assaults on cities, or battles on 
open ground, cannot be counted. Are these not several ways 
of reducing the population that have arisen through those 
who presently conduct government? Only when the sages 
governed was it not like this. When the sages governed, 
several ways of increasing the number of people also arose, 
did they not? Therefore, Master Mo said: ‘Doing away with 
useless expenditure was the Way of the sage kings; it was 
of great benefit to the world.’ 



21 


Moderation in Use II 
(Jie Yong Zhong ) 


21.1 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘In ancient times, the way 
enlightened kings and sages unified the world and corrected 
the feudal lords was through their loving the people with 
great devotion and benefiting the people very substantially. 
Devotion and trust are closely connected and are, 
moreover, made manifest by benefit. In doing this, 
throughout their lives they were never satisfied and did not 
weary until they died. Tlris was how, in ancient times, 
enlightened kings and sages unified the world and corrected 
the feudal lords. 

21.2 ‘For this reason, the sage kings of ancient times, in 
establishing their rules for moderation in use, said: 
“Throughout the world all the many artisans - wheelwrights 
and cartmakers, tanners and salters, potters and metal 



workers, and carpenters - should each do the work they are 
capable of.” They [also] said: “Everywhere we should 
provide enough for the people’s use and then stop.” 
Anything over and above this is wasteful and doesn’t add to 
the benefit of the people, so the sage kings didn’t do it. 

21.3 ‘In ancient times, the sage kings, in establishing their 
rules for drink and food, said: “[Provide] enough to fill 
what is empty and sustain the spirit, give strength to the 
limbs and make the ears and eyes sharp and keen; then stop. 
Do not go to great lengths to blend the five flavours (sweet, 
sour, bitter, pungent and salt) or to harmonize the various 
aromas, and do not look to distant lands for things that are 
rare, strange and different.” How do I know this was so? In 
ancient times, when Yao brought order to the world, in the 
south he brought peace to Jiaozhi. In the north, he 
established the boundaries of Tbudu. 1 In the east and west, 
he reached to where the sun rises and sets, and there was 
nowhere that did not submit [to his rule]. When it came to 
what he accepted and received, it was not two kinds of grain 
or large pieces of meat. He ate from a simple bowl, drank 
from a simple cup and took wine from a ladle. As for the 
ceremonial forms of bowing, walking and deportment, the 
sage kings did not practise them. 


21.4 ‘In ancient times, the sage kings, in establishing their 
rules for clothes and garments, said: “In winter, make 
clothes that are purple or brown in colour, and light as well 
as warm. In summer, make clothes of fine and coarse linen 
that are light as well as cool; then stop.” Anything over and 
above this is wasteful and doesn’t add to the benefit of the 
people, so the sage kings didn’t do it. 

21.5 ‘In ancient times, because the people were being 
injured and harmed by fierce and cunning animals, the sage 
kings taught them to carry weapons when they went out and 
about, saying [they should] wear a sword that pierced when 
used for stabbing and cut when used for striking, and did 
not itself break when struck. These are the benefits of a 
sword. When armour is worn it should be light and 
convenient and allow ease of movement. These are the 
benefits of armour. Carts are for the purpose of carrying 
heavy things over a distance. When mounted, they should 
be safe; when drawn, they should be convenient - safe in so 
far as they don’t injure people and convenient in so far as 
they reach [their destination] quickly. These are the 
benefits of carts. In ancient times, because there were great 
rivers and wide ravines which could not be crossed, the 
sage kings devised boats and oars which served their 
purpose but nothing more. Even if those above, such as 



[one of] the Three Dukes or a feudal lord came, the boats 
and oars did not change and the boatman did not decorate 
them. These are the benefits of boats. 

21.6 ‘In ancient times, the sage kings established their 
rules for moderation in funerals, saying: “Tire [burial] 
garments should be of three kinds, sufficient for decaying 
flesh. Tire coffin should be 3 cun [thick], sufficient for 
decaying bones. Tire hole for the grave should not be so 
deep as to reach water, but deep enough for the stench not 
to escape, and that is all. Once the dead are buried, the 
living should not mourn for a long period.” 

21.7 ‘Ancient times, when people first came into being, 
were times when there were no buildings and houses, so 
they relied on digging out holes in mounds and hills and 
living in them. The sage kings, in their contemplations, 
thought about this digging out and said: ‘During winter, it 
would be possible to avoid the wind and rain in this way.” 
But when summer comes, there would be dampness and 
moisture below, and steam and vapour above. They feared 
this would harm people’s spirits, therefore they created 
buildings and houses that were beneficial.’ So, then, what 
were their rules for making buildings and houses? Master 
Mo spoke, saying: ‘What is at the sides should be able to 



keep out wind and cold. What is above should be able to 
keep out snow, frost, rain and dew What is within should be 
clean and pure so it can be used for prayers and offerings. 
The inner walls of the buildings should be adequate to 
maintain the proper separation between men and women. 
That is all. Anything over and above this is wasteful and 
doesn’t add to the benefit of the people, so the sage kings 
didn’t do it.’ 



22 


Moderation in Use III 
(.Jie YongXia) 

Lost 



23 


Moderation in Funerals I 
(.Jie Zang Shang ) 

Lost 



24 


Moderation in Funerals II 
(Jie Zang Zhong ) 

Lost 



25 


Moderation in Funerals III 
(.Jie Zang Xia) 


25.1 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘Aman who is ren (loving, 
kind, humane and benevolent), in planning for the world, is 
in no way different from a filial son in planning for his 
parents. Now what will a filial son do in planning for his 
parents? I say, if his parents are poor, he devotes himself to 
making them rich. If the people [of his family] are few, he 
devotes himself to making them many. If they are many but 
in disorder, he devotes himself to creating order for them. 
When he has done these things, even if his strength is 
insufficient, or his materials are not enough, or his wisdom 
is inadequate, he has done what he can. He would not dare 
to leave any strength unspent, or scheme to hoard or cast 
away beneficial resources and not use them for his parents. 
It is by discharging these three responsibilities that the 



filial son makes provision for his parents. The man who is 
ren, in making provision for the world, is just like this. I 
say, if the world is poor, he devotes himself to making it 
rich. If the people [of the world] are few, he devotes 
himself to making them many. If they are many but in 
disorder, he devotes himself to creating order for them. 
When he has done these things, even if his strength is 
insufficient, or his materials are not enough, or his wisdom 
is inadequate, he has done what he can. He would not dare 
to leave any strength unspent, or scheme to hoard or cast 
away beneficial resources and not use them for the world. 

It is by discharging these three responsibilities that the man 
who is ren makes provision for the world. 

25.2 ‘Now when we come to the present time, the sage 
kings of the Three Dynasties of former times are dead and 
the world is bereft of yi (right action, righteousness and 
justice). Among noble men of later generations, some take 
elaborate funerals and prolonged mourning to be ren and yi 
and to be the duty of the filial son, whereas others take 
lavish funerals and prolonged mourning to be contrary to 
ren and yi and not to be the duty of the filial son. I say these 
two groups contradict each other in their words and are 
opposed to each other in their actions. They both say: “We 
are upholding and abiding by the Way of Yao, Shun, Yu, 



Tang, Wen and Wu”, but they contradict each other in their 
words and are opposed to each other in their actions. And 
because of this, the noble men of later generations are all 
in doubt and confusion regarding the two positions. 

25.3 ‘If there is doubt and uncertainty regarding the 
statements of the two parties, let us for the moment test 
them in terms of the conduct of government of states and 
their people and consider them in this light. In evaluating 
elaborate funerals and prolonged mourning, how do they 
accord with these three benefits? I think that if by making 
their words our model and implementing their plans, 
elaborate funerals and prolonged mourning can enrich the 
poor and make the few many, settle danger and bring order 
to disorder, they are ren and yi (right and proper action), 
and the duty of a filial son, so in planning for the people 
their use must be encouraged. Those who are ren will seek 
to promote them in the world, establish them and cause the 
people to praise them, and never do away with them. If, on 
the other hand, by making their words our model and 
implementing their plans, elaborate funerals and prolonged 
mourning cannot enrich the poor and make the few many, 
or settle danger and bring order to disorder, they are not 
ren and yi, and are not the duty of a filial son, so in planning 
for their people their use must be stopped. Those who are 



ren will seek to do away with them in the world, set them 
aside and cause the people to oppose them and never do 

them. 

25.4 ‘Moreover, by promoting the world’s benefits and 
eliminating its harms, there has never been, from ancient 
times to the present, a failure to bring order to the states 
and their people. How do we know this to be so? Nowadays, 
among the world’s officers and noble men, there are still 
many who are doubtful and uncertain as to whether 
elaborate funerals and prolonged mourning are in accord 
with what is right or not, and whether they are beneficial or 
harmful.’ Therefore, Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘In this case 

then, let us for a moment try to examine the matter in the 
light of those who now uphold the idea of elaborate 
funerals and prolonged mourning, taking them to be a 
service to the state. If this view is maintained, in the case of 
those remaining when a king, duke or great officer dies, 
they say that the inner and outer coffins must be heavy, the 
funeral itself must be elaborate, the funeral garments must 
be numerous, the markings and embroidery must be 
complicated and the burial mound must be large. In the case 
of those remaining when an ordinary, lowly person dies, the 
family’s resources are almost exhausted. In the case of 
those remaining when a feudal lord dies, his armoury and 



storehouse will be emptied after gold, jade, and regular and 
irregular pearls [are used] to surround the body, silk of 
various sorts is bundled up, and carriages and horses are 
interred in the tomb. There must also be many domestic 
screens, tripods, drums, tables, mats, vessels and basins as 
well as spears and swords, feathered banners, ivory and 
hides placed around and buried, to a satisfactory amount. 
With respect to those who are sent to follow [the dead], in 
the case of the Son of Heaven, the number killed and buried 
with him ranges from several hundred at the most to several 
tens at the least. In the case of a general or high-ranking 
officer, the number of people killed and buried with him 
ranges from several tens at the most to several at the least. 

25.5 ‘What will be the procedure for those in mourning? It 
is said the mourners should wail and cry, make a sobbing 
sound at irregular intervals, and wear sackcloth and hemp 
stained with tears. They should live in a mourning hut with a 
straw mat for a bed and a clod of earth for a pillow. Urey 
should also restrain each other from eating so as to appear 
starving, and they should wear thin clothes so as to be cold. 
Urey should make their appearance gaunt and wasted and 
their countenance sallow and dark. Their ears and eyes 
should not hear or see and their hands and feet should be 
without strength, as if they cannot be used. It is also said in 



respect to the conduct of mourning by high officers, that 
they must have support to be able to rise and a stick to be 
able to walk, and must carry out their duties like this for 
three years. If their statements are taken as the standard, 
and their actions accord with their words so that kings, 
dukes and great officers act like this, they will certainly not 
be able to come to court early and retire late, to carry out 
trials and to bring order to government. If officers and high 
officers act like this, they will certainly not be able to bring 
order to the Five Offices and the Six Departments, to 
develop grasslands and woods, and to fill the public 
granaries. If farmers act like this, they will certainly not be 
able to go out early and come back late, to plough and plant, 
and to cultivate the trees. If the hundred artisans act like 
this, they will certainly not be able to repair boats and 
carriages, and to make utensils and vessels. If women act 
like this, they will certainly not be able to get up early and 
go to bed late, and to carry out their spinning and weaving. 
In considering elaborate funerals, there is the burial of 
much wealth. In considering prolonged mourning, there is 
prolonged hindrance to the conduct of affairs. Materials 
already produced are buried and there is prolonged 
hindrance to further production. To seek wealth in this way 
is like preventing ploughing but seeking to reap. As a 
method of bringing about wealth it cannot work. Therefore, 



to attempt to enrich the state like this is to attempt the 
impossible. 

25.6 ‘If the wish is to increase the number of people, is this 
perhaps possible? No! Again their theories make it 
impossible. Now suppose those who believe in elaborate 
funerals and prolonged mourning are those in charge of 
government. If the ruler dies, the mourning is three years. 

If a father or mother dies, the mourning is three years. If a 
wife or eldest son dies, they also both require three years 
of mourning. After that, the period is one year for a father’s 
older and younger brothers, for one’s own older and 
younger brothers and for sons other than the first. For 
close relatives within the clan, the period is five months. 
For a father’s sisters, one’s older sisters, a sister’s child or 
a mother’s brothers, the period is several months for all of 
them. Then there are the rules requiring mourners to appear 
ravaged and emaciated, for their faces to appear gaunt and 
wasted and their complexions sallow and dark. Their ears 
and eyes should not hear or see and their hands and feet 
should be without strength, as if they cannot be used. It is 
also said, in respect to the conduct of mourning by high 
officers, that they must have support to be able to rise and a 
stick to be able to walk, and must carry out their duties like 
this for three years. If their statements are taken as the 



standard, and their actions accord with their words, and they 
starve and shrink from food like this, the ordinary people 
will not endure the winter’s cold or the summer’s heat, and 
those who become ill and die will be uncountable. This will 
also greatly damage the relations between men and women. 
To seek to increase the number of people in this way is just 
like causing a man to fall on his sword while wishing him a 
long life. As a method of increasing the number of people 
it cannot work. Therefore, to attempt to increase the 
population like this is to attempt the impossible. 

25.7 ‘If the wish is to bring order to government, is this 
perhaps possible? No! Again their theories make it 
impossible. Now suppose those who advocate elaborate 
funerals and prolonged mourning are in charge of 
government. Hie state will certainly be poor, its people will 
certainly be few and its administration will certainly be 
disordered. If their statements are taken as the standard, and 
their actions accord with their words, it causes superiors to 
act like this, so they will not be able to attend to bringing 
about order. If it causes inferiors to act like this, they will 
not be able to carry out their business. If those above don’t 
attend to bringing about order, the administration will 
certainly be disordered. If those below don’t carry out their 
business, the materials for clothing and food will certainly 



be insufficient. If they are insufficient, when a younger 
brother seeks help from an older brother, he will not get it, 
so the younger brother will not behave like a younger 
brother should, but will certainly be resentful towards his 
older brother. When a son seeks help from his parents he 
will not get it, so the son will be unfilial and will certainly 
be resentful towards his parents. When an official seeks 
help from his ruler, he will not get it, so the official will be 
disloyal and will certainly bring disorder to his superior. 
This will bring about all manner of evil conduct in the 
people because when they go out they will have no 
[adequate] clothing and when they come home they will 
have no food, so shame will build up within them giving 
rise to depravity and cruelty which cannot be overcome or 
prevented. For this reason, thieves and robbers will be 
numerous, while those who are well ordered will be few. If 
thieves and robbers are numerous and those who are well 
ordered are few, to seek order under these circumstances is 
like asking a person to turn around three times without 
turning his back to you. As a method of bringing about 
order it cannot work. For this reason, to attempt to bring 
order to the administration like this is to attempt the 
impossible. 



25.8 ‘If the wish is to prevent large states attacking small 
states, is this perhaps possible? No! Again their theories 
make it impossible. Now the reason is that since the sage 
kings of former times have already passed away, the world 
has losty/ and the feudal lords use force to make 
incursions. In the south, there are the kings of Chu and Yue, 
and in the north, there are the rulers of Qi and Jin. Urey all 
train up their troops to attack and annex [other states] and 
take control of the world. Now, in general, the reason why 
large states do not attack small states is because the latter 
have a large store of resources, have inner and outer city 
walls in good repair and have superiors and subordinates 
who are in accord. Under these circumstances, large states 
do not like to attack them. If there is no store of reserves, 
if inner and outer city walls are not in good repair and if 
superiors and subordinates are not in accord, large states 
do like to attack them. Now if those who advocate 
elaborate funerals and prolonged mourning are conducting 
government, the state will certainly be poor, its people will 
certainly be few and its administration will certainly be in 
disorder. If it is poor, there will be no means of 
accumulating resources. If the people are few, the inner and 
outer city walls and the ditches and watercourses will also 
be few. If it is in disorder, any military offence will be 
unsuccessful and any defence will not be strong. To attempt 



to prevent large states attacking small states in this way is 
to attempt the impossible. 

25.9 ‘If the wish is to gain the blessings of the Supreme 
Lord and ghosts and spirits, is it perhaps possible? No! 
Again their theories make it impossible. Suppose now that 
those who believe in elaborate funerals and prolonged 
mourning are conducting government. The state will 
certainly be poor, its people will certainly be few and the 
administration will certainly be in disorder. If it is poor, it 
means that the vessels for millet and sweet wine will not be 
pure. If its people are few, it means that those who can 
serve the Supreme Lord and ghosts and spirits will be few. 
If the administration is in disorder, it means that sacrifices 
will not be carried out at the proper times. Now if the 
service of the Supreme Lord and ghosts and spirits is 
prevented because the government is like this, the Supreme 
Lord and ghosts and spirits will, for a start, look down from 
above and ask themselves the question: “Is it better for us 
that these people exist or don’t exist?” And they will say: 
“Whether they exist or not makes no difference.” Then the 
Supreme Lord and ghosts and spirits will bring down 
misfortune on them, and punish and abandon them. And why 
shouldn’t this be so! 



25.10 ‘Therefore, the ancient sage kings formulated rules 
for carrying out funerals and burials, which said: “The 
coffin should be 3 cun [thick], sufficient for a decaying 
body The burial garments should be 3 ling (layers), 
sufficient to encase the corpse. In carrying out the burial, 
[the coffin] should not reach water below and the stench 
should not leak through above. The burial mound should 
approximate to 3 chi and no more. Once the one who has 
died is buried, those who are living must not mourn for 
long, but quickly return to their daily affairs, each doing 
what they are capable of in the pursuit of mutual benefit.” 
These were the rules of the sage kings.’ 

25.11 Now the arguments of those who advocate elaborate 
funerals and prolonged mourning say: ‘With regard to 
elaborate funerals and prolonged mourning, although they 
cannot enrich the poor or make the few many, although they 
cannot settle danger or bring order to disorder, they are, 
nevertheless, the Way of the sage kings.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘Not so. hi former times, when Yao 
went north to teach the eight Di tribes, he died on the road 
and was buried on the northern side of Mount Qiong. 1 His 
burial garments were of three layers and he had a plain 
wooden coffin tied up with vines. Only after the coffin was 
lowered into the ground was there weeping and the hole 


was just filled in without a burial mound. After the burial, 
oxen and horses crossed the grave. Shun went west to teach 
the seven Rong tribes and died on the road. He was buried 
in the marketplace at Nanji. 2 His burial garments were of 
three layers and he had a plain wooden coffin tied up with 
vines. After the burial, the people in the marketplace 
crossed the grave. Yu went east to teach the nine Yi tribes 
and died on the road. He was buried at Guiji Mountain. 3 His 
burial garments were of three layers and his coffin was of 
tong wood 3 cun thick and tied up with vines. The binding 
was not, however, close and although there was a path [to 
the grave] it was not deeply dug. The depth of the excavated 
ground was such that it did not reach water below and did 
not leak any stench above. After the burial, the earth left 
over was collected above to create a mound of 3 chi in size 
and no more. So, if we look at this matter the way these 
three sage kings looked at it, then lavish funerals and 
prolonged mourning were certainly not the Way of the sage 
kings. But the three kings were all ennobled as Sons of 
Heaven and enriched by the possession of all under Heaven, 
so how could they be anxious that the wealth amiable was 
not sufficient? It was just that they considered these to be 
the rules for funerals and burials. 


25.12 ‘Nowadays, kings, dukes and great officers in their 
conduct of funerals and burials are different. There must be 
an outer and inner coffin, embroidered hide in three layers, 
jade emblems and jade already prepared, spears, swords, 
tripods, drums, pots, vessels, embroideries and silks, and 
funeral garments in countless layers as well as carriages, 
horses, women and musicians all prepared. Urey say the 
ground must be beaten down to make a road [to the grave] 
and the burial mound should resemble a hill. Tire 
interference with the business of the people and the 
wastage of their wealth cannot be calculated. This 
constitutes the uselessness of these [funeral practices].’ 
This is wiry Master Mo said: ‘A little earlier what I 
originally said was that if by making their words our model 
and implementing their plans, elaborate funerals and 
prolonged mourning can enrich the poor and make the few 
many, settle danger and bring order to disorder, they are ren 
and yi (right and proper action), and the duty of a filial son, 
so in planning for people their use must be encouraged. 
Those who are ren will seek to promote them in the world, 
establish them and cause the people to praise them, and 
never do away with them. If, on the other hand, by making 
their words our model and implementing their plans, 
elaborate funerals and prolonged mourning cannot enrich 
the poor and make the few many, or settle danger and bring 



order to disorder, they are not ren and yi, and are not the 



duty of a filial son, so in planning for people their use must 
be stopped. 

25.13 ‘Because of this, although they seek to enrich the 
state, they greatly impoverish it. Although they seek to 
make the people many, they greatly reduce them in number. 
And although they seek to bring order to administration, 
they bring extreme disorder to it. Urey seek to prevent the 
attacks of large states on small states, but they find, in the 
end, that this is impossible. They seek to obtain good 
fortune from the Supreme Lord and ghosts and spirits, but 
they get only misfortune. On a higher plane, if we examine 
the Way of Yao, Shun, Yu, Tang, Wen and Wu, [we see that] 
it was directly opposed to this. On a lower plane, if we 
examine the affairs of Jie, Zhou, Yru and Li, [we see that] 
they were in accord with this. Looked at in this way, 
elaborate funerals and prolonged mourning run contrary to 
the Way of the sage kings.’ 

25.14 Now the arguments of those who adhere to elaborate 
funerals and prolonged mourning say: ‘If elaborate funerals 
and prolonged mourning are really not the Way of the sage 
kings, how do you account for the fact that the noble men 
of the central states practise them and don’t stop them, 
implement them and don’t abandon them?’ Master Mo said: 



‘This is what is called “[considering] one’s habits 
convenient and one’s customs yi (right and proper)”. 
Formerly, to the east of The there was the country of the 
Kaimu. 4 When an eldest son was born, they cut him up and 
ate him. Urey called this ‘fitting for the younger brother”. 
When the paternal grandfather died, they carried the 
maternal grandmother away and abandoned her, saying, “We 
cannot live with the wife of a ghost.” If, above, these things 
are taken to be government practice and, below, they are 
taken to be customs, and are carried out and not stopped, 
implemented and not discarded, then how could this be the 
Way of true ren and yV. This is what is called “[considering] 
one’s habits convenient and one’s customs yi”. 

25.15 ‘To the south of Chu there is the country of the Yan 
people. When their parents die, they allow the flesh to rot 
and discard it. Afterwards, they bury the bones, taking this 
to be [the mark of a] filial son. To the west of Qin there is 
the country of the Yiqu people. 5 When their parents die, 
they gather up kindling and firewood and burn them, and, as 
the smoke rises, they say they are rising far off. After that, 
they have fulfilled their roles as filial sons. If, above, these 
things are taken to be government practice and, below, they 
are taken to be customs, and are carried out and not 
stopped, implemented and not discarded, are they the Way 


of true ren and yil Hiis is what is called “[considering] 
one’s practices convenient and one’s customs yi (right and 
proper)”. If we look at the matter from the point of view of 
these three countries, we could also say they are 
particularly inadequate. If we look at the matter from the 
point of view of the noble men of the central states, we 
could say they are particularly excessive. On the one side, 
then, there is “particularly excessive” and, on the other 
side, there is “particularly inadequate”. But there is also 
moderation in funerals and burials.’ 

25.16 Thus, clothing and food are benefits for people who 
are living, but moderation is still valued with regard to such 
things. Funerals and burials are benefits for people who are 
dead, so why is there no moderation only in regard to such 
things? The rules which Master Mo formulates for the 
conduct of funerals and burials state: ‘Acoffin should be 3 
cun [thick], sufficient for rotting bones. Burial garments 
should be of three layers, sufficient for rotting flesh. The 
depth of the ground dug out should be such that it does not 
reach water below, and does not let vapours escape above. 
Hie burial mound should be sufficient to make the place [of 
burial] recognizable and that is all. There should be weeping 
going to and from [the funeral], but then there should be a 
return to the matters of clothing and food. There should be 



such attention to sacrifices as accords with being filial to 
parents.’ Therefore, I say this is a case of Master Mo’s 
rules not losing the benefits to either the living or the dead. 

25.17 Therefore, Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘Nowadays, the 
officers and noble men of the world, if they sincerely wish 
in their hearts to be ren and yi, and seek to be superior 
officers who desire to be in accord with the Way of the 
sage kings above, and to be in accord with the benefit of the 
ordinary people of the state below, it is right that they 
practise moderation in funerals in their conduct of 
government. This is something they cannot fail to 
examine.’ 



26 


Heaven’s Intention I 
(Tian Zhi Shang ) 


26.1 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘Nowadays, the world’s 
officers and noble men understand small matters but not 
great matters. How do I know this? I know it through their 
conduct within families. If someone within a family 
commits an offence against the head of that family, he still 
has a neighbouring family to which he can escape. 
Nevertheless, parents, older and younger brothers and 
people who know him, all join together in admonishing and 
warning him, saying, ‘You must be more cautious, you must 
be more careful! How is it possible for you to be in a 
family and commit an offence against the head of the 
family!” And it is not only conduct within families that is 
like this. Even conduct within states is like this. If someone 
in a state commits an offence against the ruler of that state, 



he still has a neighbouring state to which he can escape. 
Nevertheless, parents, older and younger brothers and 
people who know him, all join together in admonishing and 
warning him, saying, ‘You must be more cautious, you must 
be more careful! Who can possibly live in a state and 
commit an offence against the ruler of that state!” If the 
admonitions and warnings are this serious in the case of 
someone who has a place to escape to, how is it possible 
that the admonitions and warnings will not be much more 
serious in the case of someone who has no place to escape 
to? Moreover, there is the saying: “If someone commits a 
crime in the bright light of day, how will he escape it?” - 
which is to say there is no place to escape to. Now with 
Heaven, there cannot be a forest, valley or dark and 
secluded place that it does not see perfectly clearly. 
Nevertheless, with respect to Heaven, the world’s officers 
and noble men are unconcerned, and don’t realize they 
should admonish and warn each other. This is how I know 
that the world’s officers and noble men understand small 
matters but not great matters. 

26.2 ‘This being so, what does Heaven desire and what does 
Heaven abhor? Heaven desires yi (right action, 
righteousness and justice) and abhors not yi (wrong action, 
unrighteousness and injustice). In this case, if I lead the 



ordinary people of the world to conduct their affairs with 
yi, I will be doing what Heaven desires. If I do what Heaven 
desires, Heaven will also do what I desire. What, then, do I 
desire and what do I abhor? I desire good fortune and 
prosperity and I abhor bad fortune and calamity. 1 If I don’t 
do what Heaven desires, but do what Heaven doesn’t desire, 
I will lead the ordinary people of the world to land 
themselves in misfortune and calamity in the conduct of 
their affairs. This being so, how do I know that Heaven 
desires yi and abhors not yil I say that when the world is yi, 
it “lives”, and when it is not yi, it “dies”. When it is yi, it is 
rich. When it is not yi, it is poor. When it is yi, it is well 
ordered. When it is not yi, it is disordered. So then, Heaven 
desires the world’s “life” and abhors its “death”. It desires 
its wealth and abhors its poverty. It desires its order and 
abhors its disorder. This is how I know that Heaven desires 
yi and abhors not yi. 

26.3 ‘I say, moreover, that yi is what corrects. And it is not 
for inferiors to correct superiors, but, of necessity, for 
superiors to correct inferiors. For this reason, it is for the 
common people to use all their strength in carrying out 
their business and not to follow their own wishes in 
bringing about correctness. There are officers to correct 
them. It is for officers to use all their strength in the 


conduct of affairs and not to follow their own wishes in 
bringing about correctness. There are generals and great 
officers to correct them. It is for generals and great 
officers to use all their strength in carrying out their 
business and not to follow their own wishes in bringing 
about correctness. There are the Three Dukes and the 
feudal lords to correct them. It is for the Three Dukes and 
the feudal lords to use all their strength in effecting good 
order and not to follow their own wishes in bringing about 
correctness. There is the Son of Heaven to correct them. 
And the Son of Heaven does not follow his own wishes in 
bringing about correctness. There is Heaven to correct him. 
That it is the Son of Heaven who brings about correctness 
among the Three Dukes, the feudal lords, generals and great 
officers, officers and the common people was something 
that the world’s officers and noble men certainly knew 
quite clearly. That it is Heaven that brings about 
correctness in the Son of Heaven was something that the 
ordinary people of the world did not know clearly. This is 
why the sage kings of the Three Dynasties - Yu, Tang, Wen 
and Wu - in wishing Heaven to bring correctness to the Son 
of Heaven, made it perfectly clear to the ordinary people of 
the world that none should fail to prepare fodder for oxen 
and sheep, to feed grain to dogs and pigs, and to make the 
vessels of millet and sweet wine pure in order to sacrifice 



to the Great Lord, ghosts and spirits, and to seek and pray 
for good fortune from Heaven. I have never heard of 
Heaven seeking and praying for good fortune from the Son 
of Heaven. This is howl know that it is Heaven that brings 
about correctness in the Son of Heaven. 

26.4 ‘Therefore, the Son of Heaven is the world’s most 
honoured and wealthy person. And one who is wealthy and 
honoured cannot properly do otherwise than comply with 
Heaven’s intention. Further, someone who complies with 
Heaven’s intention, and who practises universal mutual love 
and exchange of mutual benefit is certainly rewarded, 
[whereas] one who opposes Heaven’s intention, who 
practises partial (discriminatory) mutual dislike and 
exchange of mutual harm is certainly punished.’ In this case 
then, who were those who complied with Heaven’s 
intention and were rewarded? And who were those who 
opposed Heaven’s intention and were punished? Master Mo 
said: ‘Formerly, there were the sage kings of the Three 
Dynasties - Yu, Tang, Wen and Wu. These were men who 
complied with Heaven’s intention and were rewarded. 
Formerly, there were the tyrannical kings of the Three 
Dynasties - Jie, Zhou, You and Li. These were men who 
opposed Heaven’s intention and were punished.’ 



26.5 If this was so, how did Yu, Tang, Wen and Wu get their 
rewards? 

Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘In their conduct, they 
honoured Heaven in the upper realm, they served ghosts 
and spirits in the middle realm and they loved the people in 
the lower realm. Therefore, Heaven’s intention said: “Those 
I love, these men love without partiality Those I benefit, 
these men benefit without partiality. In their love of the 
people, they are all-embracing and in their benefiting the 
people they are generous.” And so they were honoured by 
being made Sons of Heaven, and were enriched with all 
under Heaven. Their descendants continued for ten 
thousand generations, and they were praised for their 
goodness. And wherever in the world they are spoken of, 
right up to the present time, they are praised and called 
sage kings.’ 

If this was so, how did Jie, Zhou, You and Li get their 
punishments? 

Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘In their conduct, they abused 
Heaven in the upper realm, they abused ghosts in the 
middle realm and they harmed the people in the lower 
realm. Therefore Heaven’s intention said: “Those I love, 
these men discriminate against and hate. Those I benefit, 
these men harm in their dealings with them. In their hatred 
of the people, they are all-embracing and their harming of 



the people is substantial.” And so they did not live out their 
full lifespans and did not die at their appointed times. Right 
up to the present time, they are reviled and called cruel and 
tyrannical kings. 

26.6 ‘So then, how do I know that Heaven loves the 
ordinary people of the world? I know because it completely 
understands them. 2 And how do I know that it completely 
understands them? I know because it completely possesses 
them. And how do I know that it completely possesses 
them? I know because it provides food for them all. How 
do I know that it provides food for them all? Within the 
four seas, all people who eat grains without exception 
prepare fodder for oxen and sheep, feed grain to dogs and 
pigs, and make the vessels of millet and sweet wine pure in 
order to sacrifice to the Supreme Lord, ghosts and spirits. 
So if Heaven does possess the people, how could it be that 
it doesn’t love them? Furthermore, I say that if there is the 
killing of one innocent person, there must be one 
misfortune. And who is it that kills the innocent person? It 
is another person. And who is it that brings the misfortune? 
It is Heaven. If Heaven did not love the ordinary people of 
the world, then why if people kill each other, does Heaven 
bring them misfortune? This is how I know that Heaven 
loves the ordinary people of the world.’ 


26.7 When there is compliance with Heaven’s intention, 
there is rule by yi. When there is opposition to Heaven’s 
intention, there is rule by force. So what is rule by >'/'? 

Master Mo said: ‘Those who live in large states do not 
attack small states. Those who live in large families do not 
usurp small families. Tire strong do not plunder the weak. 
Hrose in high position do not disdain the lowly. Hrose who 
are clever do not cheat the foolish. In the upper realm, this 
must be of benefit to Heaven. In the middle realm, this 
must be of benefit to ghosts. In the lower realm, this must 
be of benefit to the people. When these three realms are 
benefited, there is nothing that is not benefited. Therefore, 
[in the case of a ruler,] the highest reputation of the world 
is given to him and he is called a sage king. Rule by force is 
different. It is the negation of this in word and the converse 
of this in deed. In fact, it is entirely the opposite. Hrose 
who live in large states do attack small states. Hrose who 
live in large families do usurp small families. Hre strong do 
plunder the weak. Hrose in high position do disdain the 
lowly. Hrose who are clever do cheat the foolish, hr the 
upper realm, this is not of benefit to Heaven. In the middle 
realm, this is not of benefit to ghosts. In the lower realm, 
this is not of benefit to the people. When these three 
realms are not benefited, there is nothing that is benefited. 
Hrerefore, [in the case of a ruler,] the most hateful name in 



the world is given to him and he is called a cruel and 
tyrannical king.’ 

26.8 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘For me Heaven’s intention 
is just like the compasses wheelwrights have and the 
squares carpenters have. Wheelwrights and carpenters take 
up their compasses and squares to evaluate square and 
round in the world, saying: “What conforms is right. What 
does not conform is wrong.” Now the books of the world’s 
officers and noble men cannot be completely recorded and 
their doctrines cannot be completely enumerated. Above, 
they persuade the feudal lords. Below, they persuade ranked 
officers. But they are a long way from ren (love, kindness, 
humanity and benevolence) and yi. How do I know this? I 
say it is because I have the clearest standard in the world to 
evaluate them with.’ 



27 


Heaven’s Intention II 
(Tian Zhi Zhong ) 


27.1 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘At the present time, if the 
noble men of the world wish to be ren (loving, kind, 
humane and benevolent) and yi (right acting, righteous and 
just), they must examine what it is that yi comes from.’ 

You say they must examine what it is that yi comes from. 
What, then, does it come from? 

Master Mo said: ‘H doesn’t come from the foolish and 
base. It must come from the noble and wise. How do I know 
that yi doesn’t come from the foolish and base, but must 
come from the noble and wise? I say that yi equates with 
good government. How do I know that yi equates with good 
government? I say that if the world has yi, then it is well 
ordered. If it does not have yi, then it is disordered. This is 
how I know that yi equates with good government. Now the 



foolish and base cannot govern the noble and wise. Only 
after there are those who are noble and wise is there 
government of the foolish and base. This is howl know that 
yi does not come from the foolish and base, but must come 
from the noble and wise. If this is so, then who is noble? 
Who is wise? I say Heaven is noble, Heaven is wise and that 
is all. In that case, then,yz undoubtedly comes from 
Heaven.’ 

27.2 Nowadays, the people of the world say: ‘We certainly 
know that the Son of Heaven is more noble than the feudal 
lords, and that the feudal lords are more noble than great 
officers. However, we do not know that Heaven is more 
noble and wise than the Son of Heaven.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘How I know that Heaven is more noble 
and wise than the Son of Heaven is as a matter of principle. 
I say that if the Son of Heaven does what is good, Heaven is 
able to reward him. If the Son of Heaven does what is cruel 
and tyrannical, Heaven is able to punish him. If the Son of 
Heaven suffers sickness or misfortune, he must fast and 
bathe, and prepare pure offerings of wine and grain to make 
sacrifices to Heaven and to ghosts. Then Heaven can rid 
him of these troubles. On the other hand, I have never heard 
of Heaven praying to the Son of Heaven for blessings. This 
is how I know that Heaven is more noble and wise than the 



Son of Heaven. But it doesn’t stop at this. It is also known 
from the writings of the former kings which explain the 
enlightened and inexhaustible way of Heaven as follows: 
“Glorious and wise is Heaven. It illuminates the world 
below.” 1 This says, in effect, that Heaven is more noble and 
wise than the Son of Heaven. Do I not also know of 
something more noble and wise than Heaven? I say that 
Heaven is the most noble and the most wise and that is all. 
In that case, then,yz certainly comes from Heaven.’ 

27.3 This is why Master Mo said: ‘Nowadays, if the noble 
men of the world genuinely wish in their hearts to abide by 
the Way and bring benefit to the people, they must start by 
examining the basis of ren and yd; by doing this, Heaven’s 
intention cannot but be complied with.’ 

If Heaven’s intention is taken as something that must be 
complied with, what, in fact, is it that Heaven desires and 
what is it that it detests? 

Master Mo said: ‘Heaven’s intention does not want great 
states to attack small states, great houses to bring disorder 
to small houses, the strong to oppress the weak, the many 
to tyrranize the few, the cunning to deceive the gullible or 
the noble to be arrogant towards the lowly. Tliese are the 
things that Heaven’s intention does not want. But it doesn’t 
stop at this. It wants those with strength to help others, 


those who know the Way to teach others and those with 
wealth to distribute it. It also wants those above to be 
resolute in the conduct of government and those below to 
be diligent in going about their business. If those above are 
resolute in the conduct of government, the state will be 
well ordered. If those below are diligent in going about 
their business, the materials for use will be sufficient. If 
the state is well ordered and materials for use are 
sufficient, then within, there is the means to make the 
sweet wine and vessels of millet pure for sacrifices to 
Heaven and ghosts, and without, there are the several jade 
emblems for relationships with neighbouring states. When 
grievances among the feudal lords don’t arise, warfare on 
the borders doesn’t occur. When within, there is food for 
the hungry and rest for the weary, and there is support and 
care for the ten thousand people, then rulers and ministers, 
and superiors and inferiors, are kind and loyal, and fathers 
and sons, and older and younger brothers, are 
compassionate and filial. Therefore, only when there is 
clear compliance with Heaven’s intention, and obedience to 
Heaven’s intention is widely practised in the world, will the 
administration be well ordered, the ten thousand people 
harmonious, the country wealthy, materials for use 
sufficient, and all the ordinary people obtain warm clothes 



and enough food so they will be at peace and free from 
anxiety.’ 

27.4 This is why Master Mo said: ‘Nowadays, if the noble 
men of the world truly wish in their hearts to abide by the 
Way and bring benefit to the people, they must start by 
examining the basis of ren and yi; by doing this, Heaven’s 
intention cannot but be complied with. Moreover, if you 
compare the Son of Heaven’s possessing all under Heaven 
and the ruler of a state or a feudal lord possessing what is 
within its four boundaries, it is really no different. 
Nowadays, when the ruler of a state or a feudal lord 
possesses what is within its four boundaries, does he wish 
his ministers and the state’s ten thousand people not to 
bring benefit to each other? If he lives in a great state and 
attacks a small state, or lives in a great household and 
brings disorder to a small household, wishing by this to 
seek reward and praise, in the end he cannot get them; 
punishment and penalties will surely come to him. Now 
Heaven’s possession of the world will, in the end, be no 
different from this. For if those who dwell in a large state 
attack a small state, or those who dwell in a large city 
attack a small city, wishing by this to seek good fortune and 
prosperity from Heaven, in the end they cannot get them; 
instead, misfortune and calamity will surely come to them. 



Then, if people don’t do what Heaven desires, or do what 
Heaven doesn’t desire, Heaven in turn will not do what 
people desire, but will do what people do not desire. And 
what is it that people do not desire? I say it is sickness and 
disease, misfortune and calamity. Not to do what Heaven 
desires or to do what Heaven does not desire is to lead the 
ten thousand people of the world into the midst of 
misfortune and calamity in conducting their affairs. 
Hierefore, in ancient times, the sage kings were clear in 
their knowledge of what Heaven and ghosts gave their 
blessings to, and avoided what Heaven and ghosts abhorred. 
In this way, they sought to promote Heaven’s benefits and 
eliminate Heaven’s harms. And so Heaven made it that cold 
and heat were moderate, the four seasons progressed 
harmoniously, yin, yang, rain and dew were timely, the five 
grains ripened, the six animals thrived and sickness, 
disaster, pestilence and famine did not occur.’ 

27.5 Therefore Master Mo said: ‘Nowadays, if the noble 
men of the world truly wish in their hearts to comply with 
the Way and benefit the people, they must start by 
examining the basis of ren and yi; by doing this they cannot 
but comply with Heaven’s intention. However, the world for 
the most part has those who are not ren and not good. I am 
speaking now, for example, of sons who do not serve their 



fathers, younger brothers who do not serve their older 
brothers and ministers who do not serve their rulers. 
Therefore, the world’s rulers join in speaking of such 
people as not good. Now, in fact, Heaven is universal in its 
love for the [people of the] world. It brings to fruition the 
ten thousand things to benefit them. Even something as 
small as the tip of a hair is created by Heaven. So what the 
people gain and benefit from can, then, be called 
substantial. Nevertheless, they still don’t repay Heaven and 
don’t know they are not being ren, and are not good. This is 
what I mean when I say that noble men are clear about small 
matters, but are not clear about great matters. 

27.6 ‘Further, how I know that Heaven’s love of the people 
is profound is this. I say it is by creating the sun, moon, 
stars and planets to light the way for them; it is by fixing 
the four seasons of spring, autumn, winter and summer to 
regulate them; it is by sending down snow, frost, rain and 
dew so the five grains, hemp and silk grow; and it is by 
letting the people gain the benefits of these materials. It 
divided off the mountains, rivers, streams and valleys and 
widely established the many officials to oversee the people 
and keep watch on what was good and bad. It created kings, 
dukes, marquises and earls and caused them to reward the 
worthy and punish the wicked. It provided metal and wood, 



birds and beasts, as well as the production of the five 
grains, hemp and silk, so the people had the materials for 
clothing and food. From ancient times until now, it has 
always been like this. Now suppose there was a man who 
had a great love for his son and exerted all his strength and 
capacity to bring benefit to him. If, when the son grows up, 
he does not repay his father, the noble men of the world 
will join in saying he is neither ren nor good. Now Heaven 
is universal in its love for the [people of the] world. It 
brings to fruition the ten thousand things to benefit them. 
Even something as small as the tip of a hair is created by 
Heaven. So what the people gain and benefit from can, then, 
be called substantial. Nevertheless, they still do not repay 
Heaven and do not know they are not being ren or good. 
This is what I mean when I say that noble men are clear 
about small matters, but not clear about great matters. 

27.7 ‘Moreover, how I know that Heaven’s love for the 
people is profound doesn’t stop at this. I say that if an 
innocent person is killed, Heaven brings down misfortune. 
Who is it that is innocent? I say it is a person. Who is it that 
brings down misfortune? I say it is Heaven. If Heaven’s love 
for the people was not profound, how do you explain the 
fact that it brings down misfortune if an innocent person is 
killed? This is why I say that Heaven’s love for the people is 



profound. Further, howl know that Heaven’s love for the 
people is profound doesn’t stop at this. I say that those who 
love and benefit people, and comply with Heaven’s 
intention, are those who get Heaven’s rewards, whereas 
those who hate and harm people, and who oppose Heaven’s 
intention, are those who get Heaven’s punishments. 

27.8 ‘Who were those who loved and benefited people, 
who complied with Heaven’s intention and who got 
Heaven’s rewards? I say that men like the sage kings of the 
Three Dynasties in former times - Yao, Shun, Yu, Tang, 

Wen and Wu - were such people. What was it that Yao, 
Shun, Yu, Tang, Wen and Wu did? I say that in their conduct 
of affairs they were universal and not partial 
(discriminatory). Where there is universality, those living 
in large states don’t attack small states, those living in large 
houses don’t bring disorder to small houses, the strong 
don’t oppress the weak, the many don’t tyrannize the few, 
the cunning don’t deceive the foolish and the noble are not 
arrogant towards the lowly. If you look at their deeds, in the 
upper realm there was benefit to Heaven, in the middle 
realm there was benefit to ghosts and in the lower realm 
there was benefit to people. If these three realms all 
benefit, then there is nothing that is not benefited. This is 
called ‘Heaven’s virtue”. Hiey (the sage kings) acquired a 



fine reputation throughout the world and added to it. I say 
they were both ren and yi. Urey are examples of those who 
loved and benefited people, who complied with Heaven’s 
intention and who got Heaven’s rewards. But it doesn’t stop 
at this. They also wrote about their deeds on bamboo and 
silk, they made carvings on metal and stone and they made 
engravings on [ceremonial] bowls and dishes for 
transmission to their descendants of later generations. You 
might ask what this achieved. It allowed us to know of those 
who loved people and benefited people, who complied with 
Heaven’s intention and who got Heaven’s rewards. The 
words of the ‘Huang Yi” in the Odes say: 

The Lord said to King Wen, 

I cherish your bright virtue. 

There is no great sound or display. 

There is no prolonged fervour for change. 

There is no recognizing or knowing. 

2 

There is just following the pattern of the Lord. 

The [Supreme] Lord was pleased with his compliance with 
the standards and so gave him Yin (i.e. the succession) to 
reward him, causing him to be ennobled as the Son of 
Heaven and enriched with all under Heaven, and his fame 
and praise to extend to the present time without ceasing. 
Thus, those who love people and benefit people, who 


comply with Heaven’s intention and who get Heaven’s 
rewards can be recognized and known. 

27.9 ‘Who were those who hated and harmed people, who 
opposed Heaven’s intention and who got Heaven’s 
punishments? I say that men like the cruel and tyrannical 
kings of the Three Dynasties in former times - Jie, Zhou, 
You and Li - were such people. How was it that Jie, Zhou, 
You and Li conducted their affairs? I say they conducted 
affairs with partiality and not with universality. When there 
is partiality, those dwelling in great states attack small 
states, those dwelling in great houses bring disorder to 
small houses, the strong oppress the weak, the many are 
tyrannical towards the few, the cunning deceive the foolish 
and the noble are arrogant towards the lowly. If you look at 
their deeds, there was no benefit to Heaven in the upper 
realm, no benefit to ghosts in the middle realm and no 
benefit to people in the lower realm. If these three levels 
are not benefited, there is nothing that is benefited. This is 
called “Heaven’s harm”. Urey (the tyrannical kings) 
acquired a reputation throughout the world for moral 
turpitude and added to it. I say they were neither ren nor yi. 
Urey are examples of those who hated and harmed people, 
who opposed Heaven’s intention and who got Heaven’s 
punishments. But it doesn’t stop at this. Urey (i.e. the sage 



kings) also wrote on bamboo and silk of the deeds of such 
men, made carvings on metal and stone and engravings on 
[ceremonial] bowls and dishes for transmission to their 
descendants of later generations. You might ask what this 
achieved. It allowed us to know of those who hated people 
and harmed people, who opposed Heaven’s intention and 
who got Heaven’s punishments. In the words of the “Great 
Oath” it says: “Zhou was particularly arrogant and 
disrespectful. He was not willing to serve the Supreme 
Lord. He abandoned his ancestors and the spirits of the 
earth and did not sacrifice [to them]. Hren he said, ‘I have 
the mandate. I do not stand in awe of ghosts and spirits.’” 3 
Heaven in turn cast off and abandoned Zhou and did not 
protect him. If we examine why Heaven cast off Zhou and 
abandoned him, [it was because] he opposed Heaven’s 
intention. Thus, those who hate and harm people, who 
oppose Heaven’s intention and who get Heaven’s 
punishments can be recognized and known.’ 

27.10 This is why, for Master Mo, Heaven’s intention is no 
different from a wheelwright’s compasses or a carpenter’s 
square. Now a wheelwright takes hold of his compasses in 
order to evaluate tilings in the world that are round and not 
round, saying: ‘What accords with my compasses is called 
round and what does not accord with my compasses is 


called not round.’ In this way, the roundness or non- 
roundness of all things can be ascertained and known. Why 
is this so? It is because the standard for roundness is clear. 
Also a carpenter takes hold of his square in order to 
evaluate things in the world that are square and not square, 
saying: ‘What accords with my square is called square and 
what does not accord with my square is called not square.’ 
In this way, the squareness or non-squareness of all things 
can be ascertained and known. Why is this so? It is because 
the standard for squareness is clear. 

27.11 Thus, for Master Mo, there is Heaven’s intention [for 
these matters]: above, he is able to estimate the conduct of 
government by the kings, dukes and great officers of the 
world, and below, he is able to measure the world’s ten 
thousand people, taking their writings as expressing what 
they are saying. He looks at their conduct. If it complies 
with Heaven’s intention, he calls it well-intentioned 
conduct, whereas if it is contrary to Heaven’s intention, he 
calls it badly intentioned conduct. He considers what they 
are saying. If it complies with Heaven’s intention, he calls 
it good speech, whereas if it is contrary to Heaven’s 
intention, he calls it bad speech. He looks at their conduct 
of government. If it complies with Heaven’s intention, he 
calls it good government, whereas if it is contrary to 



Heaven’s intention, he calls it bad government. Thus he 
establishes this as his standard and sets it up as his 
principle, using it to measure and evaluate who is ren and 
who is not ren among the world’s kings, dukes, great 
officers and ministers. It is comparable to distinguishing 
between black and white. This is why Master Mo says: 
‘Now kings, dukes, great officers, officers and noble men 
of the world, if they truly wish in their hearts to honour the 
Way and benefit the people, must examine the basis of ren 
and yi from the start, and accept that Heaven’s intention 
must be complied with. Compliance with Heaven’s 
intention is the standard of yi.' 



28 


Heaven’s Intention III 
(Tian Zhi Xia ) 


28.1 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘How shall we explain what 
brings about the world’s disorder? It is that the officers and 
noble men of the world all understand small matters but 
don’t understand great matters. How do I know that they 
understand small matters but not great matters? It is 
because they don’t understand Heaven’s intention. And how 
do I know that they don’t understand Heaven’s intention? I 
know it from the way they conduct themselves in their 
households. Nowadays, if people commit a crime in their 
own household, they still have other households to which 
they can flee. Nevertheless, fathers caution sons and older 
brothers caution younger brothers, saying: “Be cautious, be 
careful! If those who live in a household are not cautious 
and careful, what will happen in the case of those who live 



in a state?” Nowadays, if people who live in a state commit 
a crime, they still have other states to which they can flee. 
Nevertheless, fathers caution sons and older brothers 
caution younger brothers, saying: “Be cautious, be careful! 
For those who live in a state must be cautious and careful.” 
Nowadays, all the people who live in the world serve 
Fleaven. If they commit a crime against Heaven, they will 
have nowhere to flee to. Nevertheless, they do not know to 
warn and admonish each other. This is how I know they 
don’t understand great matters.’ 

28.2 This is why Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘Being cautious 
and careful must refer to doing what Heaven wishes and 
setting aside what Heaven abhors. What do I say it is that 
Heaven desires? And what is it that Heaven abhors? Heaven 
desires yi (right action, righteousness and justice) and 
abhors not -37 (wrong action, unrighteousness and 
injustice). How do I know this to be so? I say that yi is 
being correct. How do I know that yi is being correct? If 
the world has yi, it is well ordered. If there is not yi, there 
is disorder. This is how I know that yi is being correct. 

28.3 ‘However, with regard to correctness, rectification 
does not come from those below to those above. 
Unquestionably it comes from those above to those below. 



This is why the ordinary people cannot act of their own 
accord to become correct. It is officers who rectify them. 
But officers cannot act of their own accord to become 
correct. It is great officers who rectify them. But great 
officers cannot act of their own accord to become correct. 
It is feudal lords who rectify them. But feudal lords cannot 
act of their own accord to become correct. It is the Three 
Dukes who rectify them. But the Three Dukes cannot act of 
their own accord to become correct. It is the Son of 
Heaven who rectifies them. But the Son of Heaven cannot 
act of his own accord to become correct. It is Heaven that 
rectifies him. 

28.4 ‘Now the world’s officers and noble men all clearly 
understand that it is the Son of Heaven who rectifies the 
world. What they do not clearly understand is that it is 
Heaven that rectifies the Son of Heaven. This is why the 
sages in ancient times, in giving a clear explanation to the 
people, said: “If the Son of Heaven is good, Heaven is able 
to reward him. If he is at fault, Heaven is able to punish 
him.” If the Son of Heaven’s rewards and punishments are 
not appropriate, if his judgements in lawsuits are not fair, 
then Heaven sends down sickness and disease, misfortune 
and calamity. Frost and dew are untimely, and the Son of 
Heaven must, perforce, feed his cattle, sheep, dogs and 



pigs, and cleanse and make the vessels of millet and sweet 
wine pure in order to offer prayers to Heaven in the 
ancestral temple. I have never heard of Heaven offering 
prayers for good fortune to the Son of Heaven. This is how 
I know that Heaven is more noble and wise than the Son of 
Heaven. Thus, yi does not come from the foolish and lowly. 
It must come from the noble and wise. And who do I say is 
noble and wise? I say Heaven is noble and wise. In this case, 
then, yi undoubtedly comes from Heaven. Now if the 
world’s officers and noble men wish to be yi, they cannot 
do otherwise than comply with Heaven’s intention. 

28.5 ‘What do I say constitutes compliance with Heaven’s 
intention? I say it is universal love for the people of the 
world. How do I know [that Heaven] is universal in its love 
for the people of the world? It is because it is universal in 
providing food for them. How do I know that it is universal 
in providing food for them? From ancient times to the 
present, no matter how distant or remote states are, they all 
provide nourishment for their cattle and sheep, dogs and 
pigs, and clean and make the vessels of millet and sweet 
wine pure to honour and offer sacrifices to the Supreme 
Lord and the ghosts and spirits of the mountains and rivers. 
It is from this we know that [Heaven] is universal in its 
providing food for the people of the world. If it is universal 



in providing food for them, then it must be universal in 
loving them. For example, consider the rulers of Chu and 
Yue. Now the Chu king provides food for those within the 
four boundaries of Chu, therefore he loves the people of 
Chu. Tire Yue king provides food for those within the four 
boundaries of Yue, therefore he loves the people of Yue. 
Now Heaven is universal in providing food in the world. 
This is how I know that it is universal in its love for the 
people of the world. 

28.6 ‘Moreover, Heaven’s love for the ordinary people 
doesn’t simply end with this. Nowadays, in the states of the 
world, wherever there are people who eat grain, if one 
innocent person is killed, there will certainly be one 
calamity. Who is it, you ask, who kills the innocent person? 
I say it is a person. Who is it, you ask, who brings the 
calamity? I say it is Heaven. If Heaven did not truly love 
these people in its heart, what reason would it have for 
bringing about a calamity if there was an innocent person 
killed? Further, that Heaven’s love for the ordinary people 
is profound, and that Heaven’s love for the ordinary people 
is generalized, are things that can be ascertained and known. 

28.7 ‘How do we know of Heaven’s love for the ordinary 
people? We know of it because worthy people invariably 



reward goodness and punish wickedness. How do we know 
that worthy people invariably reward goodness and punish 
wickedness? It is because of the sage kings of the Three 
Dynasties of former times that we know it. Thus, in former 
times, the sage kings of the Three Dynasties - Yao, Shun, 
Yu, Tang, Wen and Wu - were universal in their love of the 
world and, as a result, brought benefit to it. Urey changed 
the way of thinking of the ordinary people, leading them to 
revere the Supreme Lord and the ghosts and spirits of the 
mountains and rivers. Heaven considered that they followed 
what it loved and loved it, and they followed what it 
benefited and benefited it. And so it added to their rewards 
and caused them to occupy a high position, establishing 
them as Sons of Heaven in order to be models. It gave them 
the name of “sage”, from which we have proof that it 
rewarded goodness. So too, in former times, the cruel and 
tyrannical kings of the Three Dynasties - Jie, Zhou, You 
and Li - universally hated the world and, as a result, harmed 
it. They changed the way of thinking of the ordinary people, 
leading them to revile and ridicule the Supreme Lord and 
the ghosts and spirits of the mountains and rivers. Heaven 
considered that they did not follow what it loved but hated 
it, and did not follow what it benefited but harmed it. And 
so it added to their punishments, causing fathers and sons 
to be dispersed and scattered, and the kingdom to be 



destroyed and lost; it caused destruction of the altars of 
soil and grain, and grief to come to them personally. And so 
the ordinary people were as one in reviling them, and for 
ten thousand generations their descendants too continued 
to revile them unceasingly. It (i.e. Heaven) named them 
“cruel and tyrannical kings”, from which we have proof that 
it punished wickedness. Nowadays, if the world’s officers 
and noble men wish to be yi, they must comply with 
Heaven’s intention. 

28.8 ‘I say that to comply with Heaven’s intention is to be 
universal. To oppose Heaven’s intention is to be partial. To 
follow the way of universality is to govern by yi. To follow 
the way of partiality is to govern by force. If you ask what 
government by yi is, I say it is the great not attacking the 
small, the strong not plundering the weak, the many not 
harming the few, the clever not cheating the foolish, the 
noble not being arrogant towards the lowly, the rich not 
being boastful towards the poor and the able-bodied not 
snatching away from the old. As a result, the many states of 
the world will not use water and fire, poisons and potions, 
or arms and weapons to harm one another. If these 
conditions obtain, then, in the upper realm Heaven is 
benefited, in the middle realm ghosts are benefited and in 
the lower realm the people are benefited. If these three 



realms are benefited, there is nothing that is not benefited. 
This is called ‘heavenly virtue’. Therefore, in all cases, 
those who conduct themselves like this will be sage-like in 
ren (kind, loving, humane and benevolent) and yi, loyal and 
kind, and compassionate and filial, which is why the world’s 
good names will be gathered together and applied to them. 
What is the reason for this? It is because there is 
compliance with Heaven’s intention. If you ask what 
government by force is, I say it is the great attacking the 
small, the strong plundering the weak, the many harming 
the few, the clever cheating the foolish, the noble being 
arrogant towards the lowly, the rich being boastful towards 
the poor and the able-bodied snatching away from the old. 
As a result, the many states of the world will use water and 
fire, poisons and potions, or arms and weapons to plunder 
and harm one another. If these conditions obtain, then, in 
the upper realm it does not benefit Heaven, in the middle 
realm it does not benefit ghosts and in the lower realm it 
does not benefit the people. If these three realms are not 
benefited, there is nothing that is benefited. This is spoken 
of as heavenly plunder. Therefore, in all cases, those who 
conduct themselves like this will be tyrannical and 
reckless, robbers and thieves, not ren (unloving, unkind, 
inhumane and not benevolent) and not yi (wrong acting, 
unrighteous and unjust), disloyal and unkind, and non- 



compassionate and unfilial, which is why the world’s bad 
names will be gathered together and applied to them. What 
is the reason for this? It is because there is opposition to 
Heaven’s intention.’ 

28.9 Therefore, Master Mo established and set up Heaven’s 
intention to act as a principle and standard just as a 
wheelwright has his compasses and a carpenter his square. 
Now a wheelwright uses compasses and a carpenter uses a 
square, because with these things they can distinguish what 
is square or round. This is why Master Mo established and 
set up Heaven’s intention to act as a principle and standard. 
With this we can know whether the world’s officers and 
noble men are distancing themselves from yi. How can we 
know whether the world’s officers and noble men are 
distancing themselves from 37 ? Now we know that rulers of 
large states expansively say: ‘If I dwell in a large state and 
don’t attack small states, how am I to be taken as great?’ 
And so they select capable officers to assist them, and 
arrange the troops on their boats and chariots in order to 
attack and reduce a state that has committed no crime. Urey 
enter the state’s boundaries, cut down its grains and crops, 
fell its forests and trees, destroy its inner and outer city 
walls, fill in its moats and pools, burn down its ancestral 
temples, and seize and kill its sacrificial animals. Those 



people who oppose them, they kill. Those who do not 
oppose them, they bind together and take back with them. 
They use the men to mind horses or in forced labour, and 
the women to pound grain or to carry water. 

28.10 Then those rulers who loved assault and attack did 
not take this to be neither ren nor yi, and accordingly told 
the neighbouring feudal lords on the four sides, saying: ‘We 
have attacked such and such a state and defeated its army, 
killing the general like capable men.’ And the rulers of the 
neighbouring states also did not know that this was neither 
ren nor yi, so they prepared gifts of fur and silk, brought 
out what they had stored away, and sent men for feasting 
and congratulations. Then those rulers who loved assault 
and attack were doubly unaware that this was neither ren 
nor yi. They wrote this on bamboo and silk and stored it in 
their storehouses for the people of later generations who 
would certainly wish to emulate the actions of their former 
rulers and so say: ‘Why is it not appropriate to open our 
storehouses and look at the models and principles of our 
former rulers?’ Urey would certainly not say, ‘Kings Wen 
and Wu conducted their governments like this.’ Urey would 
say, ‘We attacked states and defeated their armies, killing 
their generals like capable men.’ Then the rulers who loved 
assault and attack would not know that this was neither ren 



nor yi, and the rulers of their neighbouring states would 
[likewise] not know that this was neither ren nor yi. In this 
way, assault and attack were perpetuated for generation 
after generation without stopping. This is why I say, ‘If it 
was a great matter, they did not know it.’ 

28.11 How do we know what it is that is called a small 
matter? Now suppose there is a man who enters another’s 
garden or orchard and takes his peaches, plums, melons and 
ginger. If those above learn of it, they will punish him. If 
the masses hear of it, they will condemn him. Why is this? I 
say it is because he did not participate in the work, yet he 
seized the produce so what he took was not his. How much 
more so does this apply if someone jumps over another’s 
wall or fence and seizes his sons and daughters? Or if 
someone breaks into another’s storehouse and steals his 
gold, j ade and cloth? Or jumps over the railing of another’s 
animal enclosure and steals his oxen and horses? How 
much more so again does it apply if someone kills one 
innocent person? Nowadays, kings, dukes and great officers 
conduct the government. And from someone who kills an 
innocent person to someone who jumps over another’s wall 
or fence and seizes his sons and daughters, or breaks into 
another’s storehouse and steals his gold, jade and cloth, or 
leaps over the railing of another’s animal enclosure and 



steals his oxen and horses, or enters another’s wall or 
fence and steals his peaches, plums, melons and ginger, 
these same kings, dukes and great officers will punish 
them. Even in ancient times, when Yao, Shun, Yu, Tang, Wen 
and Wu were in charge of government, this was no 
different. 

28.12 Nowadays, the world’s feudal lords all still encroach, 
attack and annex. This is like killing one innocent person 
many thousands of times over. It is like jumping over 
another person’s wall or fence and seizing his sons and 
daughters, or breaking into another’s storehouse and 
stealing his gold, jade and cloth many thousands of times 
over. It is like leaping over the railing of another’s animal 
enclosure and stealing his oxen and horses, or entering 
another’s wall or fence and stealing his peaches, plums, 
melons and ginger many thousands of times over. And yet 
they themselves say it is yi (right and just). 

28.13 Therefore, Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘If this is what 
it is to be confused about yi, then how is it different from 
being confused about the distinction between black and 
white or sweet and bitter? Now suppose there is a man who, 
when you show him a little bit of black, calls it black, but 
when you show him a lot of black, calls it white. He will 



certainly have to admit that his eyes are confused and that 
he doesn’t know the difference between black and white. 
And suppose now there is a man who, when you allow him 
to taste a little sweetness, calls it sweet, but when he tastes 
a lot of sweetness, calls it bitter. He will certainly have to 
admit that his mouth is confused and that he doesn’t know 
the tastes of sweet and bitter. Nowadays, when kings, dukes 
and great officers carry out government, with regard to 
someone killing another person, his own state will try to 
prevent this because everyone knows that to do this is not 
yi (right and just). But they are able to kill large numbers of 
people in a neighbouring state and take this to be yi. How is 
this different from confusing the distinction between black 
and white, or between sweet and bitter?’ 

28.14 Hrerefore, Master Mo established Heaven’s 
[intention] as the standard. But it was not only Master Mo 
who took Heaven’s intention to be the standard. In the 
writings of the former kings such as the ‘Da Ya’ it is the 
same: 

The Lord said to King Wen, 

I cherish your bright virtue. 

There is no great sound or display. 

There is no prolonged fervour for change. 

There is no recognizing or knowing. 

There is just following the pattern of the Lord. 



This tells of King Wen’s use of Heaven’s intention as a 
standard and his compliance with the [Supreme] Lord’s 
pattern. Moreover, nowadays, the world’s officers and 
noble men, if they truly wish in their hearts to be ren and 
yi, and seek to be superior officers, and wish to accord with 
the Way of the sage kings above, and with the benefits of 
the ordinary people of the state below, cannot do otherwise 
than examine Heaven’s intention. Heaven’s intention is the 
standard of yi. 



29 


Percipient Ghosts I 
{Ming Gui Shang ) 

Lost 



30 


Percipient Ghosts II 
(Ming Gui Zhong ) 

Lost 



31 


Percipient Ghosts 1 III 
{Ming Gui Xia) 


31.1 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘Since the passing of the 
sage kings of the Three Dynasties of former times, the 
world has lost yi (right action, righteousness and justice) 
and the feudal lords use force in governing, so that those 
living now who are rulers and ministers, and superiors and 
inferiors, are without kindness or loyalty, while fathers and 
sons, and younger and older brothers, are without 
compassion, filial conduct, respect, upright behaviour and 
goodness. Those who are leaders are not diligent in the 
conduct of government while those who are lowly are not 
diligent in the conduct of affairs. Hie people give 
themselves to debauchery, cruelty, robbery, disorder, theft 
and plunder, using weapons, poisons, water and fire to stop 
innocent travellers on the roads and footpaths. As well, 


they seize their carts, horses, clothes and furs to benefit 
themselves. And since these things began, disorder has 
been created in the world. Why have things come to this? It 
is because everyone is doubtful and suspicious on the 
question of whether or not ghosts and spirits exist, and 
don’t clearly understand that ghosts and spirits are able to 
reward the worthy and punish the wicked. Now if all the 
people of the world could be brought to believe that ghosts 
and spirits are able to reward the worthy and punish the 
wicked, how could the world be in disorder?’ 

31.2 Nowadays, those who hold that there are no ghosts 
say: ‘Ghosts and spirits certainly do not exist.’ From 
morning to night they teach and instruct the people of the 
world, sowing doubt among its masses and causing them all 
to be suspicious and doubtful on the question of whether or 
not ghosts and spirits exist. This creates disorder in the 
world. For this reason, Master Mo said: ‘Nowadays, if the 
kings, dukes, great officers, officers and noble men of the 
world genuinely wish to promote what benefits the world 
and eliminate what harms it, it is right that the issue of 
whether ghosts and spirits exist or not is something that 
must be clearly examined.’ 



31.3 So the question as to whether or not ghosts and spirits 
exist is taken to be one that must be examined. In that case, 
if we are to examine this clearly, how can it be done? 
Master Mo said: ‘In bringing up the method of how the 
[people of the] world examine and know whether something 
exists or not, we must certainly take the ears and eyes of 
the masses to be a standard on the matter of existence and 
non-existence. If someone has genuinely heard or seen 
something, we must take it as existing. But if no one has 
heard or seen it, we must take it as not existing. If this is 
the case, why not put the matter to the test by going into a 
district or village and asking about it? If, from ancient 
times to the present, since people first came into 
existence, there have been those who have seen ghostlike 
or spirit-like things, or have heard ghostlike or spirit-like 
sounds, then how can ghosts and spirits be said to be non¬ 
existent? If no one has heard or seen [such things], then 
how can ghosts and spirits be said to exist?’ 

31.4 Nowadays, those who hold that there are no ghosts and 
spirits say: ‘The [people of the] world who have seen or 
heard things that are ghosts and spirits are too many to 
count, but how many of them can truly say that they have 
seen such things?’ Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘If we are to 
take what many people together have seen, or what many 



people together have heard, then someone like the Earl of 
Du of former times is a case in point. King Xuan of Zhou 2 
had his minister the Earl of Du put to death, although he had 
committed no crime. The Earl of Du said: “My ruler is 
putting me to death, although I have committed no crime. If 
those who are dead are without awareness, that will be the 
end of the matter, but if those who are dead have awareness, 
then within three years I shall certainly cause my ruler to 
know it.” Some three years later, when King Xuan of Zhou 
had gathered the feudal lords to go hunting at Pu, the 
hunting chariots numbered several hundred and the 
followers several thousand. People filled the field. On the 
stroke of noon, the Earl of Du appeared in a plain chariot 
drawn by white horses. He was wearing vermillion clothes 
and a vermillion cap; he grasped a vermillion bow and 
carried vermillion arrows under his arm. He pursued King 
Xuan of Zhou and fired at him as he rode on his chariot, 
striking him in his very centre and breaking his spine, 
killing him in his chariot. [Tire King] slumped over his 
quiver and died. At that time, among the Zhou followers, 
there was not one who did not see, and of those far away, 
not one who did not hear of it. It was recorded in the 
Spring and Autumn Annals of Zhou. It became something 
rulers used to instruct their ministers, and fathers used to 
caution their sons, saying: “Be warned! Be careful! All 


those who kill the innocent will suffer misfortune; the 
punishment of ghosts and spirits will be very swift like 
this.” If we look at what is said in writings of this sort, how 
can we doubt the existence of ghosts and spirits? 

31.5 ‘But it is not only what is said in this book that makes 
it so. Once, in former times, when Duke Mu of Zheng was 
sitting in his ancestral temple in the middle of the day, 
there was a spirit which came through the door and turned 
to the left. It had the body of a bird and wore plain garments 
of a dark colour. Its face had a square appearance. When 
Duke Mu of Zheng saw it, he was frightened and about to 
flee. The spirit said: ‘Don’t be afraid. The [Supreme] Lord 
is pleased with your shining virtue and has sent me to grant 
you a longer life by nineteen years, to make your state 
prosperous and to ensure that your progeny are vigorous 
and don’t lose [your state].” Duke Mu of Zheng bowed 
repeatedly, striking his head on the ground, and said: ‘Dare 
I ask the spirit’s name?” [The spirit] replied: “I am Gou 
Mang.” 3 If we take what Duke Mu of Zheng saw in person 
as a criterion, how can we doubt the existence of ghosts 
and spirits? 

31.6 ‘But it is not only what is said in this book that makes 
it so. In former times, Duke Jian of Yan had his minister 


Zhuang Ziyi 4 put to death, although he had committed no 
crime. Zhuang Ziyi said: “My ruler is putting me to death, 
although I have committed no crime. If those who are dead 
are without awareness, that will be the end of the matter, 
but if those who are dead have awareness, then within three 
years I shall cause my prince to know it.” One year later, 
[the people of] Yan were about to set out for Zu - Yan had 
Zu just as Qi had Sheji, Song had Sanglin and Chu had 
Yunmeng, these being places where men and women 
gathered to watch. 5 On the stroke of noon, just as Duke Jian 
of Yan was about to set out on the road to Zu, Zhuang Ziyi 
appeared carrying a vermillion staff and struck him, killing 
him in his chariot. At that time, there was not one of the 
Yan people in attendance who did not see it, and not one of 
those far away who did not hear of it. It was recorded in the 
Spring and Autumn Annals of Yan. The feudal lords 
transmitted it and spoke of it, saying: “All those who kill 
the innocent will suffer misfortune; the punishment of the 
ghosts and spirits will be very swift like this.” If we look at 
what is said in writings like this, how can we doubt the 
existence of ghosts and spirits? 

31.7 ‘But it is not only what is said in this book that makes 
it so. Formerly, at the time of Prince Wen of Song, whose 
name was Bao, there was a minister in charge of sacrifices 


called Guan Gu. Once, when he was performing his duties 
in the temple, [a spirit in the form of] a wizard carrying a 
staff appeared and spoke, saying: “Guan Gu! Why are the 
jade emblems not of the proper dimensions? Why are the 
sweet wine and vessels of millet not clean and pure? Why 
are the sacrificial animals not pristine and fattened? Wiry 
are the spring, autumn, winter and summer offerings not 
those appropriate for the time? Is this your doing or is it 
Bao’s?” Guan Gu replied: “Bao is still young and frail and 
wears swaddling clothes. How can he be responsible? I, the 
official Guan Gu, am alone responsible for this.” The 
wizard raised his staff and struck him, killing him on the 
sacrificial altar. At that time, there was not one of the Song 
people in attendance who did not see it, and not one of 
those far away who did not hear of it. It was recorded in the 
Spring and Autumn Annals of Song. Tire feudal lords 
transmitted it and spoke of it, saying: “All those who are 
not reverential and careful in the sacrifices will suffer the 
punishment of spirits and ghosts which will be very swift 
like this.” If we look at what is said in writings like this, 
how can we doubt the existence of spirits and ghosts? 

31.8 ‘But it is not only what is said in this book that makes 
it so. Formerly, among the officials of Prince Zhuang of 
Qi, there was one called Wang Liguo and another called 



Zhongli Jiao. 6 These two men had been engaged in a lawsuit 
for three years without any judgement being reached. The 
Qi prince considered putting both men to death but feared 
that one was innocent. He considered releasing both men 
but feared that one was guilty. Then he made the two men 
together bring a ram and take an oath on the Qi altars of 
soil and grain. Tire two men agreed. Thereupon, [before the 
altar] a hole was dug, the ram’s throat was cut and its blood 
was scattered. Wang Liguo then read his statement right 
through to the end. But when Zhongli Jiao was not yet 
halfway through reading his statement, the [dead] ram rose 
up and butted him, breaking his leg. As he stumbled and 
fell 7 he struck the altar and was killed at the place of the 
oath. At that time, there was not one of the Qi people in 
attendance who did not see it, and not one of those far away 
who did not hear of it. It was recorded in the Spring and 
Autumn Annals of Qi. The feudal lords transmitted and 
spoke of this, saying: “All those who swear oaths together 
but are untruthful will suffer the punishment of ghosts and 
spirits which will be very swift like this.” If we look at what 
is said in writings like this, how can we doubt the existence 
of ghosts and spirits?’ That is why Master Mo spoke, 
saying: ‘Even in deep valleys and thick forests, in dark 
places where nobody dwells, you must be careful in your 
conduct because there are ghosts and spirits watching you.’ 


31.9 Now those who hold that there are no ghosts say: 

‘How is the evidence of the ears and eyes of the masses 
sufficient to resolve doubt? How can we expect those who 
want to be high officers and noble men in the world to turn 
around and trust the evidence of the ears and eyes of the 
masses?’ Master Mo said: ‘Suppose we accept that the 
evidence of the ears and eyes of the masses is not enough 
to trust and cannot be used to resolve doubt. Would we not 
accept that the sage kings of the Three Dynasties of former 
times - Yao, Shun, Yu. Tang, Wen and Wu - are enough to 
be taken as standards? Thus, in this, all those from the 
middle [level] and above say they accept that the sage kings 
of the Three Dynasties of former times are enough to be 
taken as standards. If, in fact, the sage kings of the Three 
Dynasties of former times are enough to be taken as 
standards, then let us look for a moment at the affairs of 
these sage kings. Formerly, after King Wu had attacked Yin 
and punished Zhou, he made the feudal lords divide up the 
sacrifices, saying: “I shall let close relatives participate in 
the internal sacrifices and distant relatives participate in the 
external sacrifices.” Thus King Wu undoubtedly took 
ghosts and spirits to exist. This is wiry, after attacking Yin 
and punishing Zhou, he made the feudal lords divide the 
sacrifices. If ghosts and spirits did not exist, why would 
King Wu have made this division of sacrifices? 



31.10 ‘But it is not only the matter of King Wu that makes 
it so. Thus, when the sage kings bestowed their rewards, 
they invariably did so in the ancestral temple, and when 
they meted out [capital] punishment, they invariably did so 
at the altar of soil. Why did they bestow rewards in the 
ancestral temple? To announce [to the ghosts and spirits] 
that the apportionment was equitable. Why did they mete 
out [capital] punishment at the altar of soil? To announce 
[to the ghosts and spirits] that the judgement was fair. But it 
is not only what is said in writings like this that makes it so. 
There is also the case of the sage kings of the Three 
Dynasties of former times - Yu Xia, Shang and Zhou - 
who, in the days when they first established the kingdom 
and built the capital, certainly selected [the place for] the 
kingdom’s sacrificial altar and established it as being the 
ancestral temple. They certainly selected a place where the 
woodland was dense and luxuriant, establishing it as the 
altar of soil. They certainly selected the most 
compassionate, filial, upright and good of the fathers and 
older brothers and took them to be the leaders of the 
sacrifices. They certainly selected the most plump and 
pure-coloured of the six domestic animals and took them 
as sacrificial victims. The several jade emblems were of an 
appropriate nature and size. 8 They certainly selected the 
most fragrant and ripe of the five grains to use for the 


sweet wine and millet vessels, so the sweet wine and millet 
vessels were a reflection of whether the year was good or 
bad. Thus, in bringing order to the world, the ancient sage 
kings certainly put the ghosts and spirits first and the 
people second, as this shows. So it is said, with respect to 
the preparations and provisions by government 
departments, that it is first necessary to ensure that the 
utensils and garments for the sacrifices are all stored in the 
storehouses, that the leaders of the sacrifice and the other 
officials are all established at court and that the sacrificial 
animals are not mixed with the rest of the herd. Tlrus, in 
ancient times, the sage kings’ conduct of government was 
like this. 

31.11 ‘In ancient times, the sage kings certainly took 
ghosts and spirits to exist; their service to ghosts and 
spirits was profound. But they also feared that their 
descendants of later generations would not be able to know 
this, so they wrote it on bamboo and silk to transmit and 
hand down to them. But they all feared that [these writings] 
would decay and be worm-eaten, and be lost and destroyed, 
so their descendants of later generations would have no 
record. Therefore, they carved it on [ceremonial] basins 
and plates, and engraved it on metal and stone to be 
especially sure. But they also feared that their descendants 



of later generations would not be reverential and respectful 
enough to derive the blessings [from these writings]. 
Therefore, in the writings of the former kings, the sages, in 
every chi of silk and every pian of writings, speak many 
times of the existence of ghosts and spirits, reiterating this 
again and again. What is the reason for this? It is because 
the sage kings took it to be important. Now those who hold 
that there are no ghosts say: “Ghosts and spirits certainly 
do not exist.” This, then, is the opposite of what the sage 
kings took as fundamental. To oppose what the sage kings 
took to be fundamental cannot be regarded as the way of 
the noble man.’ 

31.12 Now the arguments of those who hold that there are 
no ghosts say: ‘If, in the writings of the former kings, the 
sages, in every chi of silk and every pian of writings, speak 
many times of the existence of ghosts and spirits, 
reiterating this again and again, then what are these 
writings?’ 

Master Mo said: ‘Of the Zhou writings, the “Da Ya” is 
one. The “Da Ya” says: 

King Wen is above, 
brightly shining in Heaven. 

But Zhou is an old country, 
and its decree is now new. 

Is Zhou not illustrious? 



Was the Lord’s decree not timely? 

King Wen ascends and descends 
on the right and left of the Lord. 

Profound indeed was King Wen, 

9 

and his fame is heard unceasingly. 

If ghosts and spirits did not exist, then when King Wen was 
dead, how could he be at the left and right of the [Supreme] 
Lord? This is how I know of the ghosts of the Zhou 
writings. 

31.13 ‘Further, if only the Zhou writings [spoke of] ghosts 
but the Shang writings did not, this would not be enough to 
take as a criterion. In that case, then, let us look for a 
moment at the Shang writings. [There] it is said: “Ah alas! In 
ancient times there was Xia. Just before the time of 
misfortune, of the hundred animals and crawling insects 
right up to the flying birds, there was none that did not 
follow the Way. Still more, of those with human faces, who 
would dare to harbour a different heart? Of the ghosts and 
spirits of the mountains and rivers, there was also none that 
dared not be at peace. If they were able to be respectful and 
sincere, the world would be harmonious and the land would 
be protected.” 10 If we examine the reason why ghosts and 
spirits of the mountains and rivers didn’t dare not to be at 
peace, it was because they were assisting Yu in the 


execution of his plans. This is how I know of the ghosts of 
the Shang writings. 

31.14 ‘Further, if only the Shang writings [spoke of] ghosts 
but the Xia writings did not, this would not be enough to 
take as a criterion. In that case, then, let us look for a 
moment at the Xia writings, [specifically] the “Oath of Yu”, 
which says: “There was a great battle at Gan. 11 The king 
ordered the six high officers to the left and right to go 
below the altar and listen to his declaration in the middle of 
the army. He said: ‘There is this man Hu and he has 
destroyed and insulted the Five Constant Virtues and has 
been careless about and abandoned the Three Paths. 12 As a 
result, Heaven attacked him and cut off his mandate.’” It 
also says: ‘“At midday, I and the man of Hu will contend for 
the fate of this day. As for all you ministers and high 
officers, and you common people, it is not that I wish for 
your lands or your precious jade. I am reverentially 
carrying out Heaven’s punishment. And if you on the left do 
not attack on the left, and you on the right do not attack on 
the right, you will not be respecting the mandate. If you 
charioteers do not control your horses, you will not be 
respecting the mandate.’” 


31.15 ‘This is why rewards were bestowed in the ancestral 
temple and [capital] punishments meted out at the altar of 
soil. Why were rewards bestowed in the ancestral temple? 
To tell [the ancestors] that the apportionment of the decree 
was equitable. Why were [capital] punishments meted out at 
the altar of soil? To tell [the ghosts] that the resolution of 
lawsuits was fair. Therefore, the ancient sage kings 
undoubtedly thought that ghosts and spirits rewarded the 
worthy and punished the wicked. This is the reason wiry 
rewards necessarily occurred in the ancestral temple and 
[capital] punishments at the altar of soil. This is howl know 
of the ghosts of the Xia writings. Thus, most anciently in 
the Xia writings, and next in those of Shang and Zhou, there 
are numerous references to the existence of ghosts and 
spirits, and these are reiterated again and again. What is the 
reason for this? It is because the sage kings took it to be 
fundamental. If we look at what is said in writings such as 
these, then how is it possible to doubt the existence of 
ghosts and spirits? In an ancient [writing] it is said: “On the 
propitious day ( dingmao ), the official conducting the 
sacrifice and representing [the ruler] offered prayers all 
around - to the spirits of the earth, to the spirits of the four 
directions, to the spirits of the year and to the spirits of 
ancestors - praying for long life [for the ruler].” If there 
were no ghosts and spirits, what could there have been to 



prolong life?’ 


31.16 It was for this reason that Master Mo said: ‘It is right 
to think that ghosts and spirits are able to reward the worthy 
and punish the wicked. If this could be established at the 
outset in the state and among the ten thousand people, it 
would truly be the way to bring order to the state and 
benefit to the ten thousand people. If the officials in charge 
of government departments are not pure and incorruptible, 
or if men and women don’t maintain the proper separation, 
ghosts and spirits see them. If people are depraved and 
cruel, giving themselves to plunder, disorder, robbery and 
theft, and using weapons, poisons, water and fire to waylay 
innocent travellers on the roads, seizing carriages, horses, 
clothes and furs for their own benefit, there are ghosts and 
spirits who see them. So the officials in charge of 
government departments don’t dare not to be pure and 
incorruptible. When they see what is good, they dare not 
fail to reward it. When they see what is evil, they dare not 
fail to punish it. And the people being depraved and cruel, 
giving themselves to plunder, disorder, robbery and theft, 
and using weapons, poisons, water and fire to waylay 
innocent travellers on the roads, seizing carriages, horses, 
clothes and furs for their own benefit, will stop because of 
this. [So there is no licentiousness even in the darkest 



places that is not clearly apparent to ghosts and spirits, and 
every single person is aware and fearful of punishment 
from above]. 13 In this way the world is well ordered. 

31.17 ‘Therefore, the percipience of ghosts and spirits is 
such that it is impossible to do something in the darkest 
places, whether in wide marshes, in mountains and forests, 
or in deep ravines, without this percipience certainly 
knowing of it. Hie punishments of ghosts and spirits are 
such that it is impossible [to avoid them], whether rich and 
noble and [having a populace that is] numerous and strong, 
or with brave and powerful forces, or with strong shields 
and sharp weapons; the punishments of ghosts and spirits 
will undoubtedly overcome these things. If you think this is 
not the case, [then consider] the Xia king, Jie of former 
times. He was ennobled as the Son of Heaven and enriched 
with all under Heaven. But he abused Heaven and insulted 
the ghosts above, and brought calamity and death to the ten 
thousand people of the world below. [He feigned before the 
Supreme Lord and endangered the Supreme Lord’s 
practices.] It was because of this that Heaven sent Tang to 
carry out its clearly recognizable punishment. Tang, with 
his nine chariots arranged in the Bird Formation and the 
Wild Goose March, ascended Da Zan, clashed with lie’s 
forces, entered the outskirts of the city and seized Tui Yi 


and Da Xi 14 with his own hands. Thus, in former times, the 
Xia king, Jie, was ennobled as the Son of Heaven and 
enriched with all under Heaven. And he had strong and 
courageous men such as Tui Yi and Da Xi who could tear 
apart a live rhinoceros or tiger and could kill a man with 
one finger. His people were numbered in the millions and 
they filled the marshes and mountains. Nevertheless, he 
was not able to ward off the punishment of ghosts and 
spirits. This is why I say that the punishments of ghosts and 
spirits are such that it is impossible [to avoid them], 
whether rich and noble and [having a populace that is] 
numerous and strong, or with brave and powerful forces, or 
with strong shields and sharp weapons. 

31.18 ‘Moreover, it was not only this that was the case. In 
former times, there was the Yin king, Zhou. He was 
ennobled as the Son of Heaven and enriched with all under 
Heaven. But he abused Heaven and insulted the ghosts 
above, and he brought calamity and death to the myriad 
people of the world below. Everywhere he abandoned old 
people, killed young children, administered the torture of 
the burning pillar to the innocent, and he ripped open 
pregnant women. The masses, widowers and widows, and 
those orphaned and alone cried out but were not heard. It 
was because of this that Heaven sent Wu to carry out its 


clearly recognizable punishment. So King Wu chose a 
hundred chariots and four hundred of his bravest soldiers 
and, after sending out appointed officers to assess their 
strength, engaged with the Yin forces in the fields of Mu. 
The King seized Fei Zhong and Wu Lai with his own hands 
and the multitude toned and fled. King Wu then pursued 
[Zhou] and entered the palace. There, on an ancient tree 
stump, he cut off his head and hung it on a red chariot 
wheel against the backdrop of a white banner to make clear 
to the feudal lords of the world that he had carried out the 
punishment. Therefore, in former times, the Yin king, 

Zhou, although he was ennobled as the Son of Heaven and 
enriched with all under Heaven, and had men of courage and 
strength such as Fei Zhong and Wu Lai, who could seize a 
live rhinoceros or tiger, or could kill a man with one finger, 
and had a populace numbered in the many millions that 
filled the lowlands and hills, he was nevertheless unable to 
ward of the punishment of ghosts and spirits. This is why I 
say that the punishments of ghosts and spirits are such that 
it is impossible [to avoid them], whether rich and noble and 
[having a populace that is] numerous and strong, or with 
brave and powerful forces, or with strong shields and sharp 
weapons. Moreover, the words of the ‘Qin Ai ” 15 say: “One 
can attain [Heaven’s] blessing no matter how lowly. One’s 
lineage can be wiped out no matter how great.” This, then, 


says that whomever the ghosts and spirits are going to 
reward, no matter how lowly, they will certainly reward him 
[and conversely], whomever the ghosts and spirits are going 
to punish, no matter how great, they will certainly punish 
him.’ 

31.19 Nowadays, those who hold that there are no ghosts 
say: ‘Is it not the case [that such things] do not accord with 
benefiting parents and are harmful to being filial?’ Master 
Mo said: ‘The ghosts of ancient and modern times are the 
same. There are ghosts of Heaven, there are ghosts and 
spirits of the mountains and rivers, and there are also 
ghosts of people who have died. Now there are instances of 
sons dying before their fathers, and of younger brothers 
dying before older brothers. Although this may be so, there 
is, nonetheless, a common saying in the world: “Those who 
are born first die first.” Thus, if the first to die is not the 
father, then it is the mother; if it is not the older brother, 
then it is the older sister. Now if we make the sweet wine 
and millet vessels pure to carry out the sacrifices with 
reverence and circumspection in case ghosts and spirits do 
really exist, this provides father and mother, older and 
younger brother with drink and food, so how is it not a 
substantial benefit? If, however, ghosts and spirits don’t 
really exist, this might seem like a waste of the materials 



used for the sweet wine and millet vessels. But on the 
matter of wastage, it is not that we just pour these materials 
into ditches and drains and cast them away. Within, the 
family members, and without, [the people] of the district 
and village, all get what is provided and drink and eat it, so 
although ghosts and spirits may not truly exist, this still 
means that large numbers of people can meet together for 
enjoyment, and this fosters a closeness [among the people] 
of district and village.’ 

31.20 Nowadays, those who hold that there are no ghosts 
say: ‘As for ghosts and spirits, they basically do not exist. 
This is why we don’t provide the materials for the sweet 
wine and millet vessels and the sacrificial victims. It isn’t 
that we are parsimonious regarding the materials for the 
sweet wine and millet vessels, and the sacrificial victims. It 
is rather a matter of asking what we will achieve.’ But 
above, this runs counter to the writings of the sage kings, 
and within, it runs counter to the conduct of filial sons 
among the people. And as far as being a superior officer of 
the world is concerned, this is not the way to be such a 
superior officer. This is why Master Mo said: ‘Now, when I 
carry out a sacrifice, it is not that I am pouring [the 
material] directly into a ditch or drain and abandoning it. I 
am effecting an exchange for the blessings of ghosts above, 



and I am bringing about a joyous meeting and fostering a 
closeness [among the people of] district and village below. 
And if spirits do exist, I am providing food for my parents 
and siblings. How, then, is this not a beneficial matter for 
the world?’ 

31.21 This is the reason why Master Mo said: ‘Nowadays, 
if kings, dukes, great officers, officers and noble men of 
the world truly wish in their hearts to seek to promote the 
benefits of the world and eliminate its harms, they ought to 
accept the existence of ghosts and spirits and cannot do 
otherwise than honour them as percipient (all-seeing). It 
was the Way of the sage kings.’ 



32 


Condemning Music I 
(Fei Yue Shang ) 


32.1 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘Tire business of those who 
are ren (loving, kind, humane and benevolent) must be to 
seek diligently to promote what benefits the world and 
eliminate what harms it, so that they will be deemed 
models for the world. If they are benefiting people, they 
act. If they are not benefiting people, they stop. 
Furthermore, those who are ren, in making their plans for 
the world, don’t make what is beautiful to their eyes, or 
pleasing to their ears, or sweet to their palates, or of 
comfort to their bodies. Urey take these things as depriving 
the people of materials for food and clothing and so those 
who are ren don’t make them.’ 

32.2 For this reason, Master Mo’s condemnation of music 
is not because he thinks the sounds of the struck bell and 



beaten drum, and of lutes and pipes, are not pleasing. It is 
not because he thinks the colours of inlays and patterns are 
not beautiful. It is not because he thinks the flavours of the 
broiled meats of grass- and grain-fed animals 1 are not 
sweet. It is not because he thinks dwellings with high 
towers, large pavilions and secluded courtyards are not 
comfortable. Although the body knows their comforts, the 
mouth their sweetness, the eyes their beauty and the ears 
their music, nevertheless, when we examine these things in 
terms of the high, they do not accord with the business of 
the sage kings, and when we evaluate them in terms of the 
low, they do not accord with the benefits of the ten 
thousand people. This is why Master Mo said: ‘Making 
music is to be condemned. 

32.3 ‘Nowadays, kings, dukes and great officers make 
musical instruments, taking it to be the business of the 
state. But this is not a simple matter like collecting water 
or digging earth. Urey will certainly have to levy heavy 
taxes from the ten thousand people to make the sounds of 
the struck bell and beaten drum, and of lutes and pipes. In 
ancient times, the sage kings also levied heavy taxes from 
the ten thousand people to make boats and carts. And when 
they were completed, they asked [themselves]: “Where will 
we use these tilings?” 2 ‘The boats we will use on water and 


the carts on land,” they said, “so noble men can rest their 
feet and lesser men can rest their shoulders and backs.” 
Therefore, the ten thousand people brought forth their 
goods and presented them, and dared not resent this. Why? 
Because in return the things gained were in accord with the 
benefits of the people. In this case, then, if musical 
instruments gave back something that was in accord with 
the benefits of the people like this, then I would not dare 
condemn them. That is to say, if there was some proper use 
for musical instruments like that of the sage kings’ use of 
boats and carts, then I would not dare condemn them. 

32.4 ‘The people have three hardships: to be hungry and not 
find food; to be cold and not find clothing; to be weary and 
not find rest. These three things are great hardships for the 
people. If this is so, then suppose we strike the great bells, 
beat the sounding drums, strum lutes, blowpipes and 
brandish shields and battleaxes. Will this enable the people 
to find the materials for food and clothing? I certainly don’t 
think this will ever be so. 

32.5 ‘But let us put this aside for the moment. 3 Nowadays, 
there are large states attacking small states. There are large 
households striking at small households. Hie strong 
plunder the weak. The many tyrannize the few. The cunning 


deceive the foolish. Hie noble are arrogant towards the 
lowly. And robbery, disorder, theft and plunder all arise and 
cannot be stopped. If this is so, suppose we strike the great 
bells, beat the sounding drums, strum lutes, blowpipes and 
brandish shields and battleaxes. Will this enable good order 
to be imposed on the disorder of the world? I certainly 
don’t think so.’ This is why Master Mo said: ‘As before, 
imposing heavy taxes on the ten thousand people in order 
to make the sounds of the great bell, the sounding drum, 
lutes and pipes won’t help in seeking to promote the 
world’s benefits and eliminate the world’s harms.’ This is 
why Master Mo said: ‘Making music is to be condemned.’ 

32.6 Nowadays, kings, dukes and great officers, when they 
sit up in their high towers and large pavilions and look at 
the bells, they just seem like upturned tripods (ding). If no 
one strikes them, how will they get any music from them? 
Clearly, for their pleasure they need someone to strike 
them. But for striking [the bells] they will certainly not use 
those who are old or young. In the case of the old and 
young, their ears and eyes are not sharp and keen, and their 
arms and legs are not quick and strong, so the sounds are 
not harmonious and the tones won’t change appropriately. 
Hiey will undoubtedly use those in their prime because 
their ears and eyes are sharp and keen and their arms and 



legs are quick and strong, so the sounds will be harmonious 
and the tones will change appropriately. If they use men to 
do this, it will interfere with their time for sowing grain and 
planting trees. If they use women to do this, it will interfere 
with their work of spinning and weaving. So now, if kings, 
dukes and great officers make music, the depleting and 
depriving people of materials for clothing and food in 
order to make music will, in this way, be very great. This is 
why Master Mo said: ‘Making music is to be condemned.’ 

32.7 Now if the great bell, the sounding drum, lutes and 
pipes are already prepared and a great officer reverentially 
plays music and listens to it alone, what pleasure will he get 
from this? If his enjoyment is not with lowly men, then it 
must be with noble men. But if he listens to [music] with 
noble men, that prevents them from attending to 
administration. And if he listens to [music] with lowly men, 
that prevents them from carrying out their work. So now, if 
kings, dukes and great officers make music, the depleting 
and depriving people of materials for clothing and food in 
order to make music will, in this way, be very great. This is 
why Master Mo said: ‘Making music is to be condemned.’ 

32.8 In former times, Duke Kang of Qi took pleasure in the 
Wan dance, but he did not allow the musicians and dancers 



to wear coarse clothing, or eat poor-quality food. He said 
that if their food and drink were not excellent, their 
appearance and countenance would not be good enough to 
look at. And if their clothes and garments were not 
excellent, their bodies and bearing would be ugly and 
emaciated and not good enough to look at. So their food 
had to be millet and meat and their clothes had to be 
patterned and embroidered. Such people never themselves 
worked [to produce] the materials for clothing and food, 
but always relied on others for their food. It was for this 
reason that Master Mo said: ‘So now, if kings, dukes and 
great officers make music, the depleting and depriving 
people of materials for clothing and food in order to make 
music will, in this way, be very great.’ This is why Master 
Mo said: ‘Making music is to be condemned.’ 

32.9 Now mankind is fundamentally different from birds 
and beasts such as the tailed deer, flying birds and small 
insects, in so far as birds and beasts like the tailed deer, 
flying birds and small insects rely on their feathers and fur 
as clothes and coverings, on their hooves and claws as 
trousers and shoes, and on water and grass as their drink 
and food. Tlris is why, even if the males don’t sow grains or 
plant trees and the females don’t spin or weave, the 
materials for clothing and food are assuredly already 



provided. Now the difference between people and these 
creatures is that people rely on their strength to live. And if 
they don’t rely on their strength, they don’t live. If noble 
men are not diligent in the conduct of government, the 
administration falls into disorder. If lowly people are not 
diligent in doing their work, the materials for use will be 
insufficient. Nowadays, officers and noble men of the 
world take my words to be wrong, so let us enumerate for a 
moment the various duties in the world and look at how 
music harms them. Kings, dukes and great officers go to 
court early and retire late. Urey decide lawsuits and bring 
order to government. These are their allotted tasks. 

Officers and noble men exhaust the strength of their limbs, 
and use to the full the capacities of their minds in bringing 
order to government offices within, and receiving the 
benefits of the taxes on passes and marketplaces, 
mountains and forests, and marshes and bridges without, so 
as to fill the public granaries and treasuries. These are their 
allotted tasks. Farmers go out early and come back late, 
sowing grains and planting trees, and collecting large 
amounts of pulses and grains. These are their allotted tasks. 
Women rise early and go to bed late, spinning and weaving 
to produce large amounts of hemp, silk and other cloth, and 
weaving cotton and silk. These are their allotted tasks. 



32.10 If as things are now, kings, dukes and great officers 
delight in music and listen to it, then they certainly will not 
be able to come to court early and retire late, resolve 
lawsuits and bring order to government. As a result, the 
state will be in disorder and the altars of soil and grain will 
be in danger. If as things are now, officers and noble men 
delight in music and listen to it, they certainly will not be 
able to exhaust the strength of their limbs and use the 
capacities of their minds to the full in bringing order to 
government offices within, and receiving the benefits of 
the taxes on mountain passes and marketplaces, mountains 
and forests, and marshes and bridges without, so as to fill 
the public granaries and treasuries. As a result, the public 
granaries and treasuries will not be full. If as things are 
now, farmers delight in music and listen to it, they certainly 
will not be able to go out early and come back late, sowing 
grains and planting trees, and collecting large amounts of 
pulses and grains. As a result, pulses and grains will not be 
enough. If as things are now, women delight in music and 
listen to it, they certainly will not be able to rise early and 
go to bed late, spinning and weaving to produce large 
amounts of hemp, silk and other cloth, and weaving cotton 
and silk. As a result, the production of cotton and silk will 
not flourish. What is it that destroys the great officer’s 
attention to government and the lowly person’s attention to 



work? I say it is music. This is why Master Mo said: 
‘Making music is to be condemned.’ 

32.11 How do we know this to be so? I say it is through the 
writings of the former kings. Tang’s ‘Official Punishments’ 
has this to say: ‘Frequent dancing in a dwelling is spoken of 
as witchcraft, hi the case of a noble man, the penalty is two 
rolls of silk. In the case of a lesser man, this is doubled.’ 4 
The ‘Great Oath’ says: ‘Ah, alas! How much dancing there 
is; how many sounds there are, clear and sharp. Hie 
Supreme Lord does not honour him. The Nine Regions will 
be lost. The Supreme Lord is displeased and will send down 
on him a hundred calamities. His household will certainly 
be damaged and destroyed.’ 5 If we examine the reason for 
the loss of the Nine Regions, it is nothing other than 
elaborate music. In the ‘Wu Guan’, it says: ‘Qi’s son (Wu 
Guan) gave himself to excess and dissipation. He ate and 
drank in the open fields. Jiang-jiang huang-huang, the 
pipes and chimes sounded in harmony. He gave himself up 
to wine. The whole day he feasted and wandered. There 
were the ordered movements of the Wan dance and the 
sounds rose to Heaven. But Heaven took this to be a 
transgression of the rule.’ 6 Thus, above, it transgressed the 
rule of Heaven and of ghosts, and below, it brought no 
benefit to the ten thousand people. 


32.12 This is why Master Mo said: ‘Nowadays, if the 
world’s officers and noble men genuinely wish to seek to 
promote what benefits the world and eliminate what harms 
it, then in regard to such a thing as music, they cannot but 
prohibit and prevent it.’ 



33 


Condemning Music II 
(Fei Yue Zhong ) 

Lost 



34 


Condemning Music III 
(Fei Yue Xia) 

Lost 



35 


Against Fate I 
(Fei Ming Shang ) 


35.1 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘In ancient times, kings, 
dukes and great officers, in governing a state, all wished 
that state to be rich, its people to be many and its 
administration to be well ordered. However, when they did 
not get prosperity but poverty instead, when they did not 
get many people but few instead, when they did not get 
order but disorder instead, this was fundamentally to lose 
what it was they desired and to get what it was they 
abhorred. What was the reason for this?’ 

35.2 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘Those who believe in Fate 
are mixed in with the population in large numbers. And they 
say, ‘If Fate decrees wealth, then there is wealth. If Fate 
decrees poverty, then there is poverty. If Fate decrees many 
people, then there are many people. If Fate decrees few 



people, then there are few people. If Fate decrees order, 
then there is order. If Fate decrees disorder, then there is 
disorder. If Fate decrees longevity, then there is longevity. 
If Fate decrees an early death, then there is an early death. 
Fate is everywhere, and although one might be strong and 
unyielding, of what benefit is that?” Above, these theories 
affect kings, dukes and great officers, causing them to 
neglect their administration. Below, these theories affect 
the common people and hinder the conduct of their affairs. 
Thus, those who believe in Fate are not ren (loving, kind, 
humane and benevolent). Therefore, it is appropriate that 
the words of those who believe in Fate cannot be otherwise 
than clearly analysed.’ 

35.3 If this is the case, how does one clearly analyse these 
theories? 

Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘Tbu must establish criteria. 
To speak without criteria is like using the upper part of a 
potter’s revolving wheel to determine the direction of the 
sunrise and sunset. The distinction between right and 
wrong, between benefit and harm cannot be realized and 
clearly understood. Therefore, theories must have three 
criteria.’ 

What are the three criteria? 



Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘There is the foundation, there 
is the source and there is the application. Wherein lies the 
foundation? Tire foundation is in the actions of the ancient 
sage kings above. Wherein lies the source? Tire source is in 
the truth of the evidence of the eyes and ears of the 
common people below. Wherein lies the application? It 
emanates from government policy and is seen in the benefit 
to the ordinary people of the state. These are what are 
termed the “three criteria”. 

35.4 ‘Nevertheless, at the present time, among the officers 
and noble men of the world, there are some who take there 
to be Fate. How can they not look to the past and consider 
the affairs of the sage kings? In ancient times, the disorder 
of Jie was inherited by Tang who brought order to it. Tire 
disorder of Zhou was inherited by King Wu who brought 
order to it. The world never changed and the people never 
changed, but under Jie and Zhou the world was in disorder, 
whereas under Tang and Wu the world was well ordered. 
How can they say there is Fate? 

35.5 ‘Nevertheless, at the present time, among the officers 
and noble men of the world, there are some who take there 
to be Fate. How can they not look to the past and consider 
the writings of the sage kings? Tire writings of former kings 



which came from the kingdom and were promulgated to the 
common people were the “Laws”. Among the “Laws” of the 
former kings were there ever those that said: “Good 
fortune cannot be requested, bad fortune cannot be 
prevented. Being respectful is not beneficial, being cruel 
and tyrannical is not harmful”? The means whereby lawsuits 
were heard and crimes were restrained were the 
“Punishments”. Among the “Punishments” of the former 
kings were there ever those that said: ‘Good fortune cannot 
be requested, bad fortune cannot be prevented. Being 
respectful is not beneficial, being evil is not harmful”? The 
means whereby armies were kept in order and deployed, 
and troops ordered to advance or retreat, were the 
“Declarations”. Among the “Declarations” of the former 
kings were there ever those that said: ‘Good fortune cannot 
be requested, bad fortune cannot be prevented. Being 
respectful is not beneficial, being cruel and tyrannical is 
not harmful”?’ This is why Master Mo said: ‘This still does 
not bring me to the end of the matter. Tire excellent 
writings of the world are too numerous to be entirely 
considered, but in general they are the same as these three. 
Now although we might look for arguments to support the 
idea of Fate, we certainly don’t find them, so can’t we 
abandon [the idea] too? Now the arguments of those who 
hold that there is Fate are used to overthrow'}? (right 



action, righteousness and justice) in the world. To 
overthrowin the world is to establish Fate, and this is to 
create distress for the ordinary people. Those who take 
delight in creating distress for the ordinary people are 
those who would destroy the people of the world.’ 

35.6 In this case then, why is there said to be the wish for 
men who are yi above? I say: ‘If there are yi men above, the 
world will certainly be well ordered. The Supreme Ruler, 
ghosts and spirits of the mountains and rivers will certainly 
have someone to lead the ancestral sacrifice, and the ten 
thousand people will receive their great benefits.’ How do 
we know this? 

Master Mo said: ‘In ancient times, Tang was enfeoffed 
with Bo which, making allowance for its irregular 
boundaries, was one hundred li square. He joined his 
people in universal mutual love and reciprocal mutual 
benefit, and when there was plenty, it was distributed. He 
led his people to honour Heaven and serve ghosts above. 
For this reason, Heaven and ghosts made him rich, the 
feudal lords joined with him, the common people loved 
him and worthy officers returned to him. Before the end of 
his own generation, he became ruler of all under Heaven 
and leader of the feudal lords. In former times, King Wen 
was enfeoffed with Qizhou which, making allowance for its 



irregular boundaries, was one hundred li square. He joined 
his people in universal mutual love and reciprocal mutual 
benefit. For this reason, those who were near were content 
with his government and those who were distant returned to 
his virtue. Those who heard of King Wen all rose up and 
hastened to him. Apart, that is, from those who were weak 
and exhausted and whose arms and legs were not up to it. 
Urey stayed where they were and asked in expectation: 
“Could the domain of King Wen not extend to us; then how 
would we not be King Wen’s people too?” This is why 
Heaven and ghosts enriched him, wiry the feudal lords 
joined him, wiry the ordinary people loved him and wiry 
worthy officers returned to him. Before the end of his own 
generation, he became ruler of all under Heaven and leader 
of the feudal lords. As I said previously, when a man who is 
yi is ruler, the world is certainly well ordered, the Supreme 
Lord and the ghosts and spirits of the mountains and rivers 
certainly have those to preside [over the sacrifices], and the 
ten thousand people are greatly benefited by them. This is 
how I know it. 

35.7 ‘This is why the sage kings of ancient times 
promulgated laws and issued decrees, and established 
through them rewards and punishments to encourage 
worthiness. In this way, within the family, there was filiality 



and compassion towards parents, and outside the family, 
there was respect and love for the young and old of one’s 
native place; in bearing, there was established practice; in 
entering and leaving, there was courtesy; and between men 
and women, there was [the proper] distinction. For this 
reason, when people were put in charge of administrative 
offices, they did not pilfer and steal; when they were called 
on to defend the city, they did not betray it; when the ruler 
encountered difficulties, they were loyal to the death; and 
when he was forced to flee, they followed him. This is what 
those above rewarded and what the ordinary people praised. 
[Yet] the arguments of those who hold that there is Fate 
say: “Whomever superiors reward is undoubtedly fated to 
be rewarded. It is not that he is worthy and therefore is 
rewarded. Whomever superiors punish is undoubtedly fated 
to be punished. It is not that he is cruel and tyrannical and 
therefore is punished.” 

35.8 ‘If this were the case, then within the family, there 
would not be filiality and compassion towards parents, and 
outside the family, there would not be respect and love for 
the young and old of one’s native place. In bearing, there 
would not be established practice; in entering and leaving, 
there would not be courtesy; and between men and women, 
there would not be [the proper] distinction. For this reason, 



when people were put in charge of administrative offices, 
they would pilfer and steal; when they were called on to 
defend the city, they would betray it; when the ruler 
encountered difficulties, they would not be loyal to the 
death; when he was forced to flee, they would not follow 
him. This is what those above punished and what the 
ordinary people reviled. [Yet] the arguments of those who 
hold that there is Fate say: “Whomever superiors punish is 
undoubtedly fated to be punished. It is not that he is cruel 
and tyrannical and therefore is punished. Whomever 
superiors reward is undoubtedly fated to be rewarded. It is 
not that he is worthy and therefore is rewarded.” In this 
way, rulers are not yi, ministers are not loyal, fathers are 
not compassionate, sons are not filial, older brothers are 
not caring and younger brothers are not respectful. The 
origins of inhuman theories and the ways of cruel and 
tyrannical men lie especially in strong adherence to these 
ideas. 

35.9 ‘In this case, then, how do we know that fatalism is the 
way of evil men? Formerly, the poor people of earlier 
generations were covetous of drink and food and were 
indolent in the conduct of their affairs, so that the material 
for clothing and food was insufficient and the hardships of 
hunger and cold were extreme. But they did not know 



[enough] to say: “We are weak and unworthy, and not 
diligent in the conduct of affairs.” Instead, they had to say: 
“Our fate has determined that we are poor.” Formerly, the 
cruel and tyrannical kings of earlier generations could not 
restrain the desires of their ears and eyes or the depravity 
in their hearts. They did not act in accordance with their 
parents so subsequently the kingdom was lost and the altars 
of soil and grain were overturned. But they did not know 
[enough] to say: “I am weak and unworthy and my conduct 
of government has not been good.” Instead, they had to say: 
“It was my fate surely to lose it (the kingdom).” 

35.10 ‘In “The Announcement of Zhong Hui”, it says: “I 
have heard the man of Xia feigned the decree of Heaven 
and put forth a decree to his subjects. The Supreme Lord 
thereupon resented him and destroyed his forces.” 1 This 
tells how Tang rejected lie’s belief in Fate. In “The Great 
Oath”, it says: “Zhou was haughty and imperious and was 
not willing to serve the Supreme Lord and ghosts and 
spirits. He neglected the spirits of his ancestors and did not 
sacrifice to them, going so far as to say that his people 
were fated. He was not diligent in his service to ghosts and 
spirits, so Heaven also abandoned him and did not protect 
him.” This tells how King Wu rejected Zhou’s belief in 
Fate. 


35.11 ‘Now if the arguments of those who hold that there is 
Fate are put into practice, those above will not attend to 
government and those below will not carry out their 
business. If those above don’t attend to government, the 
administration will be in disorder. If those below don’t 
carry out their business, materials for use will be 
insufficient. Those above will not have the means to 
provide the millet vessels and sweet wine to offer 
sacrifices to the Supreme Lord and ghosts and spirits, and 
those below will not have the means to provide stability for 
the world’s worthy and capable officers. Without, there will 
not be the means to receive the visits of feudal lords, and 
within, there will not be the means to feed the hungry and 
clothe the cold, or to care for the old and feeble. 

Therefore, with regard to Fate, it is of no benefit to Heaven 
in the upper realm; it is of no benefit to spirits in the 
middle realm; it is of no benefit to people in the lower 
realm. Tire origins of inhuman theories and the ways of 
cruel and tyrannical men lie especially in strong adherence 
to these ideas.’ 

35.12 This is why Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘Nowadays, 
officers and noble men of the world who genuinely desire 
in their hearts wealth for the world and abhor its poverty, 
who desire good order for the world and abhor its disorder, 



cannot but oppose the arguments of those who hold that 
there is Fate. This is of great harm to the world.’ 



36 


Against Fate II 
(Fei Ming Zhong ) 


36.1 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘In general, in stating a 
doctrine or writing it down, one must first establish 
standards and criteria. Making a statement without 
standards is like trying to establish the direction of the 
sunrise and sunset with the upper part of a potter’s 
revolving wheel. Even a skilled craftsman would certainly 
not be able to achieve correctness. And so it would be 
impossible to reach a reliable conclusion about what is true 
and false in the world at the present time. Therefore, in 
making a statement, there are three criteria. What are the 
three criteria? That there is a basis, that there is an origin 
and that there is a use. With regard to its basis, examine the 
intentions of Heaven and ghosts, and the affairs of the sage 
kings. With regard to its origin, verify it through the 



writings of the former kings. What of its use? This comes 
out in the conduct of government. These are the three 
criteria for a statement. 

36.2 ‘At the present time, there are some among the 
world’s officers and noble men who take there to be Fate 
and there are some who take there not to be. Howl know 
whether there is Fate or not is through the evidence of the 
ears and eyes of the masses. This is how I know whether it 
exists or not. If there are those who hear it or see it, I say it 
exists. If there are not those who hear it or see it, I say it 
doesn’t exist. Hris being so, how can we not test and 
examine the evidence from the ordinary people? From 
ancient times to the present, since people first came to 
exist, has anyone ever seen such a thing as Fate, or heard 
the sounds of Fate? There has never been anyone who has. 
If the ordinary people are considered to be foolish and 
unworthy and the evidence of their ears and eyes is 
regarded as inadequate as a criterion, wiry not test and 
examine the transmitted words and statements of the feudal 
lords? From ancient times to the present, since people first 
came to exist, have any of them heard the sound of Fate or 
seen the substance of Fate? There has never been anyone 
who has. Hris being so, wiry not test and examine the affairs 
of the sage kings? In ancient times, the sage kings 



promoted filial sons and encouraged them to serve their 
parents. Urey respected the worthy and virtuous and 
encouraged them to be good. Urey issued regulations and 
promulgated edicts to teach and instruct. Urey clarified 
rewards and punishments to encourage goodness and 
prevent evil. In this way then, what was in disorder could be 
brought to order and what was dangerous could be made 
safe. If you think this wasn’t so, [consider] the disorder 
wrought by Jie in former times and how Tang brought order, 
or the disorder wrought by Zhou and how King Wu brought 
order. In these cases, the age did not change and the people 
did not change. The ruler changed the government and the 
instruction of the people changed. When they were under 
[the rule of] Tang and Wu, there was order. When they were 
under [the rule of] Jie and Zhou, there was disorder. Peace 
and danger, order and disorder lie with the government of 
the ruler. How, then, can you say there is Fate? I say that 
those who claim there is Fate are altogether wrong. 

36.3 ‘Now the arguments of those who hold that there is 
Fate say: “We did not create this at a later time. From the 
Three Dynasties of former times on, there has been this 
view which has been handed down. Why, sir, do you now 
oppose it?” I say with respect to there being Fate, do we not 
know whether it came from the sages and good men of the 



former Three Dynasties or from the evil and unworthy men 
of the Three Dynasties of former times? How do we know 
this? In the beginning, the various officers and brave 
grandees were careful in their speech and wise in their 
actions. This meant they could advise and admonish their 
rulers and leaders above, and could teach and instruct the 
ordinary people below. Hrerefore, above, they received 
rewards from their rulers and leaders, and below, they 
received praise from the ordinary people. The reputation of 
these various officers and brave grandees is [still] heard 
about and has not died away, having been handed down to 
the present time. And the whole world says it was their own 
ability. They are certainly not able to say, “I see Fate there.” 

36.4 ‘This is wiry the cruel and tyrannical kings of the 
Three Dynasties in former times did not curb the excesses 
of their senses or control the depravity in their hearts. 
Without, they galloped their horses and hunted. Within, 
they drowned themselves in wine and music. Urey did not 
look to the government of the ordinary people of their 
kingdoms. They did much that was useless, and cruelly 
oppressed the ordinary people, causing those below not to 
love their superiors. As a result, their kingdoms were 
emptied of people and without posterity while they 
themselves met with punishment and death. Yet they were 



not willing to say: “I am weak and unworthy and my conduct 
of government has not been good.” Instead they had to say: 
“It was my fate surely to lose it (the kingdom).” 

36.5 ‘Formerly, even the poor people of the Three 
Dynasties were also like this. Within, they were not able to 
serve their parents and relatives well, and without, they 
were not able to serve their rulers and leaders well. Urey 
abhorred respect and moderation and loved rudeness and 
ease. They coveted drink and food and were lazy in 
attending to their business, so materials for clothing and 
food were insufficient, bringing them the hardships of 
hunger and cold. Yet they were certainly not able to say: 
“We are weak and unworthy, and have not been diligent in 
the conduct of affairs.” Instead they had to say: “It is our 
fate surely to be poor.” 

36.6 ‘Formerly, even the people of the Three Dynasties 
who resorted to deception were also like this. [They had] 
numerous elaborate [arguments] about the existence of 
Fate which they used to teach the many ignorant and simple 
people over a long period, and this was a concern for the 
sage kings. Therefore, they wrote about it on bamboo and 
silk and carved it on metal and stone. In the book of the 
former kings, the “Tire Announcement of Zhong Hui”, it 



says: “I have heard the man of Xia feigned the decree of 
Heaven and put forth a decree to his subjects. Hie Supreme 
Lord thereupon resented him and destroyed his forces.” 1 
This tells of the Xia king Jie’s belief in Fate and that Tang 
and Zhong Hui together rejected this. In the book of the 
former kings, ‘The Great Oath”, there are such words, 
saying: “Zhou was haughty and imperious and was not 
willing to serve the Supreme Lord. He neglected his 
ancestral spirits and did not sacrifice to them, saying that 
his people were fated, so there was no need for him to be 
diligent in his service [to ghosts and spirits]. [As a result] 
Heaven abandoned him and did not protect him.” This tells 
of Zhou’s belief in Fate and how King Wu with “The Great 
Oath” rejected this. 

36.7 ‘Also in the “Three Dynasties, One Hundred 
Kingdoms”, there is the statement: “\bu should not 
venerate Heaven as having Fate.” So the ‘Three Dynasties, 
One Hundred Kingdoms” also speaks of the non-existence 
of Fate. In Duke Shao’s “Implementing Orders” it is the 
same. [This] says: “[There should be] respect [for ghosts 
and spirits]. But there is no heavenly Fate. There are the 
two of us and we do not speak falsely. Fate is not sent down 
from Heaven. It comes from ourselves.” 2 In the Odes and 
the Documents of the Shang and Xia dynasties, it is said 


that Fate is the creation of cruel and tyrannical kings. 
Moreover, at the present time, for the world’s officers and 
noble men who wish to distinguish the causes of right and 
wrong and of benefit and harm, it is right that a belief in 
Fate must be resolutely rejected.’ To hold that there is Fate 
is of profound harm to the world, which is why Master Mo 
rejected it. 



37 


Against Fate III 
(Fei Ming Xia) 


37.1 Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘In general, when making a 
statement, it is not permissible to fail to establish a 
standard first and then speak. If you do not establish a 
standard first and [then] speak, it is like using the upper part 
of a potter’s revolving wheel and trying to establish the 
direction of the sunrise and sunset with it. I think that, 
although there is a distinction between the sunrise and the 
sunset, you will, in the end, certainly never be able to find it 
and establish it. This is wiry there are three criteria for a 
statement. What are these three criteria? I say there is 
examining it, there is determining its origin and there is 
putting it to use. How do you examine it? You examine the 
affairs of the first sages and great kings. How do you 
determine its origin? Ybu look at the evidence from the 



ears and eyes of the masses. How do you put it to use? You 
set it out and use it in governing the state, considering its 
effect on the ten thousand people. Hrese are called the 
“three criteria”. 

37.2 ‘Thus, in the past, at the time when the sage kings of 
the Three Dynasties - Yu, Tang, Wen and Wu - were 
governing the world, they said: “We must devote our 
attention to promoting filial sons and encouraging them to 
serve their parents. We must honour men who are worthy 
and virtuous and teach them to be good.” For this reason, 
they brought forth government and gave instruction. Urey 
rewarded the good and punished the bad. Moreover, when 
you view it like this, if there is disorder in the world, it can 
be overcome and order brought about; and if there is danger 
to the altars of soil and grain, it can be overcome and peace 
brought about. If you don’t think this is so, consider the 
disorder formerly wrought by Jie and how Tang brought 
order; consider the disorder wrought by Zhou and how King 
Wu brought order. At these times, the age did not change 
and the people did not change. Tire ruler changed the 
government and the people changed their customs. As it 
existed under Jie and Zhou, the world was in disorder. As it 
existed under Tang and Wu, the world was well ordered. The 
good order of the world was due to the efforts of Tang and 



Wu. Hie disorder of the world was due to the faults of Jie 
and Zhou. If you look at it like this, peace and danger, order 
and disorder lie in the ruler’s conduct of government. How, 
then, it is permissible to say there is Fate! 

37.3 ‘Therefore, in the past, at the time when Yu, Tang, Wen 
and Wu were governing the world, they said: “We must 
ensure that those who are hungry get food, that those who 
are cold get clothes, that those who are weary find rest, and 
those in disorder find order.” Subsequently, they acquired a 
glorious reputation throughout the world. How can this be 
thought of as Fate? It must undoubtedly be thought of as 
due to their efforts. Nowadays, men who are worthy and 
virtuous respect worthiness and love the Way. Therefore, 
they obtain the rewards of kings, dukes and great officers 
above, and they get the praise of their people below, so that 
subsequently they acquire a glorious reputation throughout 
the world. Can this also be put down to Fate? This too 
should be taken to be through their efforts! In the case of 
those who nowadays believe in Fate, do we not know 
whether this comes from the sages and good men of the 
Three Dynasties in the past, or from the cruel and unworthy 
men of the former Three Dynasties? If we look at this in 
the light of what has been said, then it certainly cannot be 



from the sages and good men of the former Three 
Dynasties, so it must be from the cruel and unworthy men. 

37.4 ‘However, now, with respect to those who take there 
to be Fate, there were the former evil kings of the Three 
Dynasties - Jie, Zhou, You and Li - who were ennobled as 
Sons of Heaven and enriched with all under Heaven. But in 
this they were not able to curb the desires of their ears and 
eyes and followed the depravity in their hearts. Outside, 
they galloped their horses and hunted. Inside, they drowned 
themselves in wine and music. They did not look to the 
government of the ordinary people of their kingdoms. They 
did much that was useless and cruelly oppressed the 
ordinary people. Subsequently, they lost their ancestral 
temples. But they didn’t say: “I have been weak and 
unworthy. I have not been resolute in my conduct of 
affairs.” Instead, they invariably said: ‘Tate has determined 
that I shall lose the kingdom.” Formerly, even the indolent 
and unworthy people of the Three Dynasties were like this 
too. Urey were not able to serve their parents and relatives 
or their rulers and leaders well. Urey had a deep abhorrence 
of respect and moderation and loved rudeness and ease. 
Urey coveted drink and food and were lazy in attending to 
their business, so materials for clothing and food were 
insufficient. This is why they themselves were caught up in 



the hardships of hunger and cold. But they didn’t say: “We 
are weak and unworthy We have not been resolute in our 
business.” They too said: ‘Tate has determined that we shall 
be poor.” The deceptive people of the former Three 
Dynasties were like this too. 

37.5 ‘The cruel and tyrannical kings of former times 
created Fate and the poor people handed it on. And this 
raised doubt in the masses and deceived the gullible, which 
was something that troubled the first sage kings. This is 
why they wrote about it on bamboo and silk, carved it on 
metal and stone, and engraved it on ceremonial vessels and 
cups to hand down to their descendants of later 
generations. You may ask, what writings were preserved? 
Yu’s “Zong De” has this to say: “If you don’t have faith, 
Heaven and the people will not be able to protect you. If 
you give free rein to a cruel heart, Heaven will send down 
disasters. If you don’t carefully cultivate your virtue, how 
can Heaven’s decree protect you?” “Tire Announcement of 
Zhong Hui” says: ‘T have heard that the man of Xia feigned 
the decree of Heaven and put forth a decree to his subjects. 
The Supreme Lord thereupon resented him and destroyed 
his forces.” He (Jie) took something that did not exist as 
existing, therefore he is said to have ‘feigned”. If 



something did exist and he said it existed, how could he be 
spoken of as “feigning”? 

37.6 ‘In former times, Jie held to a belief in Fate and acted 
on it. Tang created “Tire Announcement of Zhong Hui” in 
order to condemn him. The words of “Tire Great Oath” in 
the “Tai Zi Fa” say: “Air princes! Heaven has manifest 
virtue. Its actions are luminously displayed. It made a 
‘mirror ’ near at hand and that was the Yin king. He said 
people had a fate. He said that reverence could not be put 
into practice. He said that sacrifices brought no benefit. He 
said that cruelty did no harm. Hre Supreme Lord was not 
pleased and the Nine Regions met with destruction. Hre 
Supreme Lord was not pleased and he sent down calamities. 
I represent the Zhou house and have received the great 
Shang.” Formerly, Zhou held to a belief in Fate and acted 
on it. King Wu created “Tire Great Oath”, ‘Tai Zi Fa”, in 
order to condemn him. I say, why not examine what has 
happened before in the records of the Shang, Zhou, Yu and 
Xia. In the ten chapters referred to above, there is no 
mention of Fate. How will you account for that?’ 

37.7 For this reason, Master Mo said: ‘Nowadays, noble 
men of the world create writings to expound their doctrines 
and ideas. And they don’t do this just to exercise their 



throats and tongues or to benefit their mouths and lips. 

Urey do it because they are people who wish in their hearts 
to carry out the administration of their states, cities and 
villages and the ten thousand people. Nowadays, why is it 
that kings, dukes and great officers go to court early and 
retire late, hearing lawsuits and bringing order to 
government, and for the whole day give proper attention to 
their duties, not daring to be remiss? I say it is because they 
think such diligence ensures good order while lack of 
diligence must result in disorder, and that diligence ensures 
peace while lack of diligence must result in danger. So they 
dare not be remiss. Nowadays, wiry is it that ministers and 
high officials exhaust the strength of their limbs, and use 
the full capacity of their wisdom, to bring order to 
government offices within, and to gain the benefits of the 
taxes on passes and marketplaces, mountains and forests, 
marshes and bridges without, in order to fill the 
government coffers, and dare not be remiss? It is because 
they think that diligence ensures nobility while lack of 
diligence ensures baseness, and that diligence ensures 
glory while lack of diligence must result in disgrace. 
Therefore, they dare not be remiss. 

37.8 ‘Nowadays, wiry is it that farmers go out early and 
come back late, and are diligent in their sowing of grain and 



planting of trees, gathering large amounts of pulses and 
grains, not daring to be remiss? I say it is because they 
think that diligence ensures wealth while lack of diligence 
must result in poverty, and that diligence ensures satiety 
while lack of diligence must result in hunger. So they dare 
not be remiss. Nowadays, why is it that women get up early 
and go to bed late and are diligent in their spinning and 
weaving, producing large amounts of hemp, silk and other 
cloth and weaving cotton and silk, not daring to be remiss? I 
say it is because they think that diligence ensures wealth 
while lack of diligence must result in poverty, and that 
diligence ensures warmth while lack of diligence must 
result in cold. So they dare not be remiss. In the present 
circumstances, if kings, dukes and great officers trust in 
the existence of Fate and act accordingly, they will 
certainly be remiss in resolving lawsuits and bringing order 
to government, ministers and great officers will certainly 
be remiss in managing government offices, farmers will 
certainly be remiss in the sowing of grain and planting of 
trees, and women will certainly be remiss in their spinning 
and weaving. 

37.9 ‘If kings, dukes and great officers are remiss in 
hearing lawsuits and bringing order to government, and if 
ministers and high officials are remiss in bringing order to 



government departments, then I think the world will 
certainly be in disorder. If farmers are remiss in sowing 
grain and planting trees, and if women are remiss in 
spinning and weaving, then I think the material for the 
world’s clothing and food will certainly not be sufficient. If 
the government of the world is conducted like this, then 
above, in the case of serving Heaven and ghosts, they are 
not complied with, and below, in the case of nurturing the 
ordinary people, they are not benefited and will certainly be 
dispersed and scattered and cannot be put to use. Defence 
against invasion will not be secure and punitive expeditions 
will not be successful. So the reason why, in former times, 
the cruel and tyrannical kings of the Three Dynasties - Jie, 
Zhou, Yo u and Li - all lost their kingdoms and overturned 
the altars of grain and soil was precisely this.’ 

37.10 This is why Master Mo spoke, saying: ‘Nowadays, 
the world’s officers and noble men who in their hearts 
genuinely wish to seek to promote the world’s benefits and 
eliminate its harms are right to reject resolutely words like 
those which claim the existence of Fate. They should say 
that [the concept of] Fate was a creation of the cruel and 
tyrannical kings and was perpetuated by the poor people. It 
was not something that people who were ren (loving, kind, 
humane and benevolent) spoke of. Nowadays, for those 



who are ren and yi (right acting, righteous and just), this is 
something that will need to be examined and strongly 
rejected.’ 



38 


Against the Confucians I 
(Fei Ru Shang ) 

Lost 



39 


Against the Confucians II 
(Fei Ru Xia) 


39.1 The Confucians say: ‘In treating relatives as relatives, 
there are gradations. In respecting the worthy, there are 
gradations.’ 1 They speak of the differences of near and 
distant, and honourable and humble. Their Book of Rites 
states: ‘Mourning for a father or mother is three years; for 
a wife or eldest son it is three years; for older and younger 
brothers of the father, younger and older brothers and other 
sons it is one full year; and for other family members it is 
five months.’ 2 If the calculation of the period of years and 
months is based on nearness and distance, it should be long 
for near relatives and short for distant relatives. This is to 
take the wife or eldest son to be the same as the father [or 
mother]. If the calculation of the period of years and 
months is based on being honourable or humble, this is to 


honour the wife or son the same as the father or mother and 
to consider paternal uncles and older brothers to be like the 
sons of concubines. What greater perversity is there than 
this! When a parent dies, they lay out the corpse without 
preparation while they climb on to the roof, peer into the 
well, poke about in rat holes and look into washbasins 
seeking the person. Taking the parent actually to be alive is 
foolish in the extreme. To know they are dead but feel 
compelled to seek them is also a great hypocrisy! ’ 

39.2 [When a Confucian] takes a wife, he goes to meet her 
in person, correctly attired as a servant. He holds the reins 
of the cart himself and hands her the cord to draw herself 
up as if honouring a revered parent. Hie wedding ceremony 
is conducted with solemnity just like conducting a 
sacrifice. This is to turn high and low upside down and is 
perverse conduct towards parents who are brought down to 
the level of the wife while the wife infringes on those 
above. In serving parents, how can something like this be 
called filial? 

Hie Confucians say: ‘After taking a wife, she can join 
with you in carrying out the sacrifices while a son will 
protect the ancestral temple; therefore they are highly 
regarded.’ 



In reply I say: 3 ‘These are false words in so far as a man’s 
uncles and older brothers maintain the ancestral temple for 
several decades, and yet when they die, he mourns them for 
one year while the wives of older and younger brothers, 
who assist at the sacrifices to his ancestors, are not 
mourned at all. Thus, mourning wives and sons for three 
years is certainly not because they maintain the ancestral 
temple or assist at sacrifices. Such favourable treatment of 
wives and sons is already excessive. They also say, “It is the 
way of honouring parents.” In wishing to treat “thickly” 
those whom they are most partial towards, they treat 
“thinly” those who are most important. Is this not a great 
impropriety?’ 

39.3 They also hold firmly to the doctrine that there is 
Fate, arguing thus: ‘Living to old age and dying young, 
poverty and wealth, peace and peril, and order and disorder 
are determined by Heaven’s decrees and cannot be 
decreased or increased. Success and failure, reward and 
punishment, good luck and bad, are established [by Fate] 
and cannot be affected by a person’s knowledge or 
strength.’ If the many officials believed this, they would be 
careless in their allotted duties. If the ordinary people 
believed this, they would be careless in following their 
tasks. If officials don’t bring about order, there is disorder. 


If agricultural matters are attended to tardily, there is 
poverty. Poverty and disorder strike at the root of 
government, yet the Confucians take Fate as a doctrinal 
teaching. This is damaging to the people of the world. 

39.4 Moreover, they use various elaborate rites and music 
to delude people. Urey use prolonged mourning and false 
grief to deceive relatives. They believe in Fate and accept 
poverty, yet they are arrogant and self-important. They turn 
their backs on what is fundamental and abandon their duties, 
finding contentment in idleness and pride. Urey are greedy 
for drink and food. Urey are indolent in carrying out their 
responsibilities and sink into hunger and cold, but when 
endangered by starvation and freezing, they have no way of 
avoiding these things. Urey are like beggars. Urey hoard 
food like field mice. Urey stare like billy-goats. Urey rise 
up like castrated pigs. When a noble man laughs at them, 
they angrily reply: ‘Useless fellow! What do you know of 
good Confucians.’ In spring, they beg for wheat. In summer, 
they beg for rice. When the five grains have already been 
harvested, they attach themselves to large funerals with 
their sons and grandsons all following along, and so they 
get their fill of drink and food. If they are put in charge of 
several funerals, they have enough to live on. Urey depend 
on other people’s households for food and rely on other 



people’s fields for wine. When a rich man has a funeral, 
they are very happy indeed and say with delight: ‘This is a 
source of clothing and food.’ 

39.5 Confucians say: ‘Anoble man must use ancient modes 
of speech and dress before [he] can be considered ren 
(loving, kind, humane and benevolent).’ 

I say in reply: ‘What is called ancient in speech and dress 
was all new once upon a time. So, if the men of old spoke 
and dressed in this way, they were not noble men. This 
being so, must we clothe ourselves in the garb of those who 
are not noble men and speak the speech of those who are 
not noble men before being considered renV 

39.6 [Confucians] also say: ‘Hie noble man follows but 
does not create.’ 

I say in reply: ‘Among the ancients, Yi created the bow, 
Yu created armour, Xi Zhong created the cart and 
Craftsman Chui created the boat. In this case then, are the 
tanners, armourers, cart-makers and carpenters of the 
present time all noble men and Yi, Yu, Xi Zhong and 
Craftsman Chui all lesser men? Moreover, someone must 
have created what the follower follows. This being so, then 
is that which is followed the way of the lesser man in all 
cases?’ 



39.7 [Confucians] also say: ‘When the noble man triumphs 
in battle, he doesn’t pursue those who are fleeing, he 
doesn’t fire at those caught in traps and he helps those in 
retreat to drag their heavy carts.’ 

I say in reply: ‘If they are all ren men, there is no reason 
for them to contend. Ren men inform each other of the 
principles of selecting and rejecting, and of right and 
wrong. If they are without a cause, they follow those who 
have a cause. If they are without knowledge, they follow 
those who have knowledge. When they have no argument, 
they invariably yield. When they see good, they invariably 
change. What reason do they have to contend? If the two 
parties fighting with each other are evil, then although 
those who triumph might not pursue the fleeing enemy, or 
shoot at those who are trapped, and might help those in 
retreat to drag their heavy carts - even if they are able to do 
all this - they still don’t get to be considered noble men. 
Consider a state that is cruel and destructive, and suppose a 
sage, intending to rid the world of evil, raises an army to 
eradicate and punish it, and he triumphs. And then because 
he is using Confucian methods, he issues orders to his 
soldiers, saying: “Do not pursue those who are fleeing; do 
not shoot at those who are trapped; help those in retreat to 
drag their heavy carts.” Then those who are cruel and 
destructive will hold on to life and the harm to the world 



will not be done away with. This is to act in a way that is 
damaging and destructive to parents and deeply detrimental 
to ordinary people. There is nothing so contrary to yi (right 
action, righteousness andjustice)!’ 

39.8 [Confucians] also say: ‘The noble man is like a bell. If 
you strike a bell, it sounds. If you don’t strike it, it doesn’t 
sound.’ 

I say in reply: ‘The man who is ren displays the utmost 
loyalty in serving his superior and devotes himself to being 
filial in serving his parents. If those whom he serves are 
good, he praises them. If they are at fault, he censures 
them. This is the way of the man who is a minister. Now if 
he sounds when struck, but doesn’t sound when not struck, 
this is to conceal his knowledge and set aside his ability, 
and to wait quiet and unconcerned until he is questioned 
before replying. Although something may be of great 
benefit to his prince or parents, if he is not asked, he 
doesn’t speak. For example, if there is about to be a great 
incursion or disorder, or thieves and robbers are about to 
strike, or some trap is about to be sprung, and he alone 
knows this while others don’t, and yet even if his ruler and 
parents are all present, he doesn’t speak unless asked, he is 
a criminal bringing about great disorder. Such a man is not 
loyal as a minister, he is not filial as a son, he is not 



respectful in serving an older brother and he is not honest 
and virtuous in his dealings with others. He restrains 
himself and doesn’t speak on court matters. Indeed, even if 
he sees something of benefit to himself, he is afraid to 
speak out. 4 If his ruler speaks of something that will not be 
beneficial, then he just folds Iris hands and looks to the 
floor, saying in a strangled voice as if deep [in thought]: 
‘This is something I never learned about.” Even if the 
matter is pressing, he distances himself and avoids it. When 
principle, method, learning, duty, ren and yi are brought 
together as one, they are all, on a large scale, means of 
bringing order to the people, and, on a small scale, means 
of serving as an official. Distantly, they should be 
implemented everywhere. Near at hand, they should be used 
to cultivate the self. One should not abide what is not yi. 
One should not do what contravenes principle. One should 
devote one’s efforts to furthering the benefit of the world. 
One should take every measure to achieve this objective. If 
something is not of benefit, one should stop. This is the 
way of the noble man. From what I have heard of 
Confucius’ conduct, it was the opposite of this at a 
fundamental level.’ 

39.9 Duke Jing of Qi questioned Yan Zi, 5 saying: ‘What 
sort of man is Confucius?’ 


Yan Zi did not reply so the Duke asked him again, but 
again he did not reply. 

Duke Jing said: ‘Many people have spoken to me about 
Confucius and they all take him to be a worthy man. Now I 
ask you about him and you don’t reply. Why is this?’ 

Yan Zi replied, saying: ‘Ying is a worthless person and is 
not up to knowing who is a worthy man. Nevertheless, I 
have heard it said about a worthy man that when he enters 
another’s state, he certainly devotes himself to fostering 
close relationships between the ruler and his ministers and 
eliminating antagonism between superiors and inferiors. 

But when Confucius went to Jing, he knew of Duke Bo’s 
plans and introduced him to Shi Qi. [As a result,] the ruler 
almost lost Iris life and Duke Bo himself was killed. 6 Ying 
has heard that when a worthy man gains his superior’s trust, 
he should not waste his position. When he gains the trust of 
his subordinates, he should not endanger them. If his words 
are heeded by the ruler, they must benefit the people. If his 
teachings are carried out by his subordinates, they must 
benefit the ruler. Unis is why his words must be clear and 
easy to understand and why his conduct must be 
unequivocal and easy to follow. If his conduct i s yi (right 
and just), it can bring enlightenment to the people. If his 
plans are well considered, they can be communicated to 
ruler and ministers. Now Confucius gave deep 


consideration and careful planning to bringing about 
rebellion. He thought hard and exhausted his knowledge to 
carry out evil. He encouraged subordinates to rebel against 
their superiors and he instructed ministers to kill their 
ruler. These are not the actions of a worthy man. To enter 
another’s state and join with the people in rebellion is not 
the mark of yi. To know the people are not loyal and incite 
them to rebellion is not the mark of ren. To evade others 
before planning and to avoid others before speaking means 
that conduct which is yi cannot enlighten the people and 
plans which are well considered cannot be communicated 
to ruler and ministers. Ying does not see how Confucius is 
any different from Duke Bo. That’s why I didn’t reply.’ 

Duke Jing said: ‘Alas! I have taught my people a great 
deal, but if it were not for you, I would have lived my whole 
life without knowing that Confucius was the same as Duke 
Bo.’ 

39.10 Confucius went to Qi to see Duke Jing. Duke Jing 
was delighted and wished to enfeoff him with Nixi. 7 He 
told Yan Zi of this. 

Yan Zi said: ‘Don’t do it. Confucians are arrogant and 
opinionated and cannot be used to instruct subordinates. 
They love music and deprave people; they cannot be close 
to government. They set up Fate and are indolent in affairs; 


they cannot be used to bear responsibility. Urey honour 
mourning and prolong grief and cannot show compassion to 
the people. Urey wear strange clothes and maintain a 
strained bearing and cannot bring leadership to the masses. 
Confucius decks himself out in splendid attire in order to 
beguile the world. He uses strings and drums, songs and 
dances to gather followers. He complicates the ceremonies 
of ascending and descending to display ritual. He devotes 
attention to the rules of walking quickly and circling around 
to draw the gaze of the masses. He is broad in learning, but 
he cannot establish principles for the age. He is diligent in 
thought, but he cannot use this to help the people. In several 
lifetimes one could not exhaust his learning, but in the 
prime of life one is not able to carry out his ritual 
practices. Agreat accumulation of wealth does not enable 
one to provide for his music. He uses complicated 
adornments and heterodox methods in order to delude the 
rulers of the age. He makes much use of the sounds of 
music to influence and hoodwink the people. His Way 
cannot be used to represent the times. His learning cannot 
be used to lead the masses. Now you would enfeoff him in 
order to benefit the customs of Qi. This is not the way to 
guide the state or lead the masses.’ 

‘Well said,’ replied the Duke. 



After this, he was lavish with his ceremonies, but he put 
aside the enfeoffment. He accorded Confucius respect, but 
did not inquire about his Way. Confucius was outraged. He 
became furious with Duke Jing and Yan Zi, and then, having 
appointed Chiyi Zipi to the entourage of Tian Chang, he 
informed Nanguo Huizi of what he wanted done and 
returned to Lu. After a time, when he heard that Qi was 
going to attack Lu, he informed Zigong, saying: ‘Ci, now is 
the time to raise the great matter.’ He then sent Zigong to 
Qi where, through an introduction by Nanguo Huizi, he met 
with Tian Chang. He urged him to attack Wu and, instructing 
Gao, Guo, Bao and Yin to do nothing to hinder Tian Chang’s 
rebellion, he urged Yue to attack Wu. Within the space of 
three years, Qi and Wu were states facing destruction and 
the corpses of the dead were numbered in hundreds of 
thousands. 8 This was the result of Confucius’ schemes. 

39.11 When Confucius was acting as minister of justice in 
Lu, he forsook the ducal house and served the interests of 
Ji Sun. Ji Sun was chief minister to the Lu prince, and yet 
he fled. As he was struggling with the guards of the city 
gate, Confucius lifted the bar for him. 9 

39.12 Confucius fell on hard times while between Cai and 
Chen and was living on broth made from brambles without 


any rice mixed in. After ten days, Zilu boiled up a pig which 
Confucius ate without asking where the meat came from. 
Zilu also divested a man of his robe to exchange for sweet 
wine which Confucius drank without asking where the 
liquor came from. Yet when Confucius was received by 
Duke Ai, he did not sit if the mat was not straight and did 
not eat what was not cut properly. 10 

Zilu came forward and asked: ‘Why do you do the 
opposite of what you did between Cai and Chen?’ 

Confucius replied: ‘Come! I shall tell you. At that time, 
with you, I was anxious about surviving. Now, with you, I am 
anxious about doing what is yi (right).’ 

When starving and in straitened circumstances, he did 
not shrink from any means of preserving his life. When 
satiated and in abundance, he acted falsely to glorify 
himself. In terms of being impure, dishonest, deceitful and 
hypocritical, what could be greater than this! 

39.13 Once when Confucius was sitting together with his 
disciples, he said: ‘When Shun saw Gu Sou, he was ill at 
ease. At that time the world was in danger. Was Dan, the 
Duke of Zhou, a man who was not rail Why did he forsake 
his ducal house and retire to his private dwelling?’ 11 

This is what Confucius’ conduct and the workings of his 
mind came to. And his students and disciples all imitated 


him. Zigong and Ji Lu aided Kong Kui in bringing disorder 
to Wei. 12 Yang Huo brought disorder to Qi. Fu Xi involved 
Zhongmou 13 in rebellion. Qidiao inflicted punishment and 
death. 14 In terms of cruelty, what is greater [than these 
instances]? Those who are disciples and follow their 
teacher must practise his doctrines and model themselves 
on his conduct, but if their strength is inadequate and their 
knowledge doesn’t match up, they subsequently give up. 
Now if Confucius’ conduct was like this, Confucian 
scholars should then be regarded with suspicion! 



Part III 


DIALECTICAL CHAPTERS 



Introductory Note 


All editors and commentators agree that chapters 40-45 of 
the Mozi present very considerable textual and 
interpretative problems. Mei Yipao, who omitted them 
from the first substantial English translation, wrote that 
these chapters, ‘besides the unsettled question as to their 
respective authorship the few pages probably make the 
hardest reading in the whole body of Chinese literature’. 1 

Very briefly stated, these problems fall into two 
categories: individual characters and the arrangement of the 
text. Hie first category includes the use of characters that 
are now unknown, characters that were taboo 2 at the time of 
compilation of the lost Song Daoist Patrology (probably 
the source of the present text via the Ming Daoist 
Patrology ) and basic errors of copying, such as the 
mistaken use of characters of similar sound or form, and 
simple omissions and duplications. The second category 
includes the curious arrangement of the Canons indicated 
by the very brief five-word comment immediately before 


the final Canon of the A series to read the text horizontally, 
the initial failure to recognize the importance of the head 
character (which states the topic) in identifying the start of 
each Explanation, dislocation of whole groups of 
characters during transfer of the text from wooden writing 
strips to a continuous text, and the interpolation of 
glosses. 3 However, over the past two hundred years much 
work has been done by a number of dedicated scholars, and 
we now have a relatively reliable text, although much room 
remains for interpretative variation. 

The arrangement of the Canons (C) and Explanations (E) 
in the Daoist Patrology (DZ) is that the Canons appear as 
consecutive chapters (40 and 41) and within these chapters 
the individual Canons follow the sequence 1, 51, 2, 52, etc. 
for the 99 Canons in the A series, and 1, 41,2, 42, etc. for 
the 81 Canons in the B series. The Explanations also appear 
in consecutive chapters (42 and 43), but are arranged in 
numerical order (1,2,3, 4, etc.), which is the arrangement 
in some modern texts. In others the A series C&Es are 
placed together in numerical order (i.e. chapters 40 and 42 
are combined and rearranged) as are the B series C&Es 
(chapters 41 and 43). That is, in both series each C is 
followed by its E and the two sequences are in numerical 
order; this arrangement in the present work is used on 
grounds of clarity. 


Abreak in the DZ text occurs in chapter 40 (Jing 
Shang ) with the Canons A51-A99 intermingled with 
A1-A50. A90-A93 have no corresponding E in the DZ 
text, which was accepted by early editors, but modern ones 
make A86 and A88 the Es for A90 and A92. (Graham, who 
prepared the first detailed study in English on this material, 
regards all four sentences as misplaced and includes them 
in his separate, composite treatise ‘Names and Objects’.) 
There appears to be a dislocation in the DZ text for chapter 
41 ( JingXia ) as B22-B24 follow B1 3, which makes the 
arrangement of B14-B16 somewhat problematical. 

NOTES 

1. M ei Yipao, The Ethical and Political Works of Motse (London: Probsthain, 

1929; Hyperion reprint, 1993), p. xii. 

2. For a brief description of taboo characters, see Endymion Wilkinson, Chinese 
History: A Manual (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2000), pp. 86- 
7. 

3. A detailed account of the textual problems in these chapters is ‘Textual 
Problems’, in Graham, Later Mohist Logic, Ethics and Science, pp. 72-110. 


40 and 42 


Canons and Explanations A 
(Jing and Jing Shuo Shang ) 


A1 

C: Acause is that which obtains before something comes 
about. 

E: Cause: When there is a minor cause, something is not 
necessarily so; when there is not, something is necessarily 
not so. It is a part - like a point. When there is a major 
cause, something is necessarily so; when there is not, 
something is necessarily not so. It is like seeing something 
completes seeing. 

Comment: E elaborates on the definition, identifying minor and major causes, 
equivalent to ‘necessary ’ and ‘necessary and sufficient’ conditions, respectively. 
The examples are obscure and variably interpreted. 


A2 



C: Apart is a division of the whole. 

E: Apart: For example, one is apart of two; a point is apart 
of a chi (a measured length). 


A3 

C: Knowing is a capacity. 

E: Knowing: With regard to the capacity of knowing, it is 
how one knows and knows with certainty. It is like seeing. 

Comment: This is the first of four definitions of epistemological terms (A3-A6). 


A4 

C: Cogitating is seeking. 

E: Cogitating: With regard to cogitating, it is through one’s 
knowing that there is a seeking [of something], but one 
does not necessarily find it. It is like seeing indirectly. 

A5 

C: Knowing is contacting. 

E: Knowing: With regard to knowing, it is through one’s 
knowing [capacity] ‘passing’ a thing that one is able to form 
an impression of it (describe it). It is like seeing. 

A6 

C: Understanding is seeing clearly. 


E: Understanding: With regard to understanding, it is 
through one’s knowing and explaining a thing that one’s 
knowing it is made manifest. It is like seeing clearly. 

Comment: This is the most problematic of the four epistemological definitions. 
With respect to all four, the position taken here is that the first and third refer to 
‘primary’ acts of cognition, taking place directly through the senses, while the 
second and fourth indicate mental activity of either a conceptual or analytic nature. 
The fourth and final process - that of understanding - is the most elaborate and 
required a new character, which is that for knowing (zhi) with that for mind (xin) 
below it. The correspondence to the various aspects of vision is then with the 
eyesight in general as a function, with an indirect or uncertain aspect of the process, 
with the direct aspect of seeing and finally, with the bringing of clarity to knowing 
by understanding compared to clarity in vision. 


A7 

C: Ren (love, kindness, humaneness and benevolence) is to 
love individually. 

E: Ren : Loving the self is not for the sake of the self being 
of use. It is not like loving a horse. 

Comment: A7-A20 deal with conduct and ethics, the majority with common and 
important terms. Those in A7-A9 are of particular importance in Confucianism, 
which are here defined using terms of importance in Mohism in A7 and A8. The 
issue of the love of the self within the framework of universal, non-discriminating 
love is addressed in Mozi 44.7. 


A8 

C: Yi (right action, righteousness, justice) is being of 
benefit. 


E: Yi : Hie resolve to take the world as one’s sphere of 
action and, having ability, being able to benefit it. It is not 
necessary to be used (i.e. to have an official position). 


A9 

C: Li (proper conduct in interpersonal relationships and 
ceremonial practices) is respect. 

E: Li: The noble have the title ‘duke’, while the lowly just 
have a name - yet for both there is respect and rudeness. It 
is only in rank that they (i.e. the noble and the lowly) differ. 

Comment: The relationship between li and respect (jing) is stated at the start of 
the Book of Rites ( LiJi , SSJZS, vol. 5, p. 12). The Mohist view is that it should 
apply regardless of rank or position and run through all strata of society, in contrast 
to the Confucian position, as also exemplified in the Book of Rites (SSJZS, vol. 5, p. 
55). 


A10 

C: Conduct is doing. 

E: Conduct: What is done without thought of bettering 
one’s name is conduct. What is done to better one’s name 
is speciousness. It is like being a robber. 

All 

C: (Inner) substance should equate with the (outer) display. 



E: (Inner) substance: His will is manifest in his spirit and 
causes others to be like himself. It is not like the tinkling 
of metal or jade adornments. 

A12 

C: Loyalty is to strengthen the lowly, taking this to be 
beneficial. 

E: Loyalty: It is not beneficial to a young lord to be 
disloyal. On entering the prince’s presence one must 
correct one’s bearing. 


A13 

C: Being filial is to benefit parents. 

E: Being filial: To take one’s parents as one’s sphere of 
action and, having ability, to be able to benefit them. It is 
not necessary to attain [recognition]. 

Comment: A13 is closely similar in form to A8. One issue is what it is not 
necessary to gain, including personal reputation and the love or recognition of the 
parents. Another is that the range of filial feeling is not limited to one’s own parent 
or parents. 


A14 

C: Trustworthiness is words being in accord with thoughts 
(intentions). 


E: Trustworthiness: It is not just a matter of one’s words 
being appropriate; for example, sending a person to look in 
the city and his getting gold. 

Comment: Although there might be some debate about the best reading of yi 
(thoughts or intentions) and to a lesser extent of xin (trustworthiness), the meaning 
of C is generally agreed upon. The point of E is that if you tell someone there is 
gold in the city, they should expect to find it. It may be an explanation or metaphor 
for the value of trustworthy words. 


A15 

C: To help is the self acting. 

E: To help: With one person, being in close association; 
with many people, complying with the crowd. 

A16 

C: To be scrupulous is acting to bring satisfaction. 

E: To be scrupulous: If doing ‘this’ is dangerous to another, 
it is not done. 


A17 

C: To be ashamed relates to acting wrongly. 

E: To be ashamed: If one recalls doing something 
regrettable, one knows it and is distressed. 


A18 


C: Acommand is not doing what is done. 

E: Acommand: If it is not something one would do 
oneself, it should not be done. 


A19 

C: To act responsibly is an officer bringing harm to himself 
but being of benefit in what he does. 

E: To act responsibly: To do what is unpleasant for oneself 
in order to accomplish what is pressing for others. 

Comment: There are minor variations in interpretation: many commentators read 
ren (to act responsibly) as renxia in the sense of ‘chivalry’, while others see it in the 
more usual sense of assuming official responsibility, as above. 


A20 

C: Courage is the means whereby the will dares [to act], 

E: Courage: Praise him for daring to act in this matter. Do 
not disparage him for not daring to act in that matter. 

Comment:Although courage/bravery is equated with being fearless (e.g. Analects 
IX.28), it is more complex, in that while the courage of a daring act is readily 
recognized, the courage not to act in certain situations must also be recognized. 


A21 

C: Force is what moves a body. 

E: Force: Said with reference to a weight. Lowering and 
raising a weight is to move it. 



Comment: From its position A21 should be considered as one of the ethical terms 
and linked with the preceding definitions of acting responsibly and with courage; it 
certainly appears to be the final term in the sequence of general terms relating to 
conduct, so Graham’s translation as ‘strength’ is attractive. It is noteworthy that li 
(force, strength) is linked with yong (courage, bravery) in the Zhuangzi 29: ‘They 
buy the courage and strength of other men and through this become awesome and 
powerful.’ Nonetheless, most modem commentators accept the emendations on 
which my translation is based and interpret both C and E in terms of physics; in 
fact, almost as a statement of Newton’s First Law. Particularly is this so with E 
where xia (to lower) is equated with the downwards gravitational force (although 
not of course recognized as such) and ju (to raise) as a force raising a body. Li is, 
however, certainly used in Confucian texts in relation to conduct, e.g. Analects 1.7 
and the Doctrine of the Mean XX. 10 where it relates to ren (love, kindness, 
humaneness and benevolence). 


A22 

C: Life is when body and mind exist (are located) 
[together]. 

E: Life: ‘Filling’ it is life; there is a constant association 
that cannot be separated. 

Comment: The distinction is between the corporeal and the mental, between body 
and mind/spirit, both being the essential prerequisites for life. Quite different 
interpretations are offered for E. Some see A22-A25 as relating to Daoist thinking, 
but in fact similar statements and definitions are found in a number of early texts of 
varying philosophical hue. 


A23 

C: To sleep is to have the capacity for knowing but not its 
function. 


E: To sleep: None 

Comment: Some attribute the absence of an E here (and elsewhere) to the clarity of 
the C. 


A24 

C: To dream is to be asleep and yet to take something to be 
so. 

E: To dream: None 

Comment: Many commentators equate the head character meng with the character 
of similar pronunciation defined in the Shuo Wen (an ancient dictionary) as ‘sleeping 
soundly yet being aware’; others refer to ZhuangZi’s well-known dream of himself 
as a butterfly (Zhuangzi 2). 


A25 

C: To be at peace is to know no desire or aversion. 

E: To be at peace: To be tranquil. 

A26 

C: Benefit is what one is pleased to get. 

E: Benefit: If one gets this and is pleased, then this is 
benefit. If it is harmful, it is not this. 

Comment: Forms a pair with All. 


All 

C: Harm is what one is displeased to get. 


E: Harm: If one gets this and is displeased, then this is 
harm. If it is beneficial, it is not this. 

A28 

C: In bringing about order there is seeking and obtaining. 
E: In bringing about order: My affairs are put in order; 
others also bring about order to north and south (i.e. to the 
world). 


A29 

C: To praise is to make clear the good. 

E: To praise: This strengthens one’s actions. Its words are 
pleasing and urge people on. 

Comment: This and A30 form a pair, but while there is identity of form in C, there 
is considerable doubt regarding E. 


A30 

C: To censure is to make clear the bad. 

E: Censure: [This] stops one’s actions. Its words are 
shaming. 


A31 

C: To raise (pick out) is to identify an entity. 


E: To raise (pick out): To inform by means of its name is to 
pick out that entity. 

Comment: Ju (to raise, pick out) is an important Later Mohist term - see, e.g., 
Mozi 45.1: ‘It is through names that entities are picked out’. 


A32 

C: To speak is to bring forth raisings (to pick out). 

E: To speak: Speaking is said of the mouth’s ability to bring 
forth names. A name is like a picture of a tiger. Speaking is 
to say. Speech is what is achieved through names. 

Comment: There are major problems with the E text. One relatively 
straightforward and not unreasonable interpretation of C makes a close connection 
with A31’s C. Thus ju (to raise, pick out) offers a likeness of an entity while yan 
(to speak) puts this process into words. 


A33 

C: About to is to say (something) is going to be so. 

E: About to: From beforehand, one says about to; from 
afterwards, one says already; at the moment of occurrence, 
there is also about to. 

Comment: The most common and obvious interpretation is that two uses of the 
head character qie are being identified and are differentiated as referring to something 
that is going to happen in the future at some unspecified time and something that is 
actually on the point of, or in the process of, happening - these uses being 
contrasted with something that has already happened. 


A34 


C: Aruler is one who brings officials and people together 
in agreement. 

E: Aruler: He is the means of compliance with edicts. 

Comment: The E is quite contentious; it may indicate accord between ruler and 
subjects, referring to the Greater Learning X.3. 


A35 

C: Meritorious service is benefiting the people. 

E: Meritorious service: It does not await a time, like 
summer and winter garments do. 

Comment: There are two interpretations: if the meritorious service is not carried 
out at the appropriate time, it is useless or even harmful; and, reflected in this 
translation, meritorious service does not depend on a certain time, like clothing, but 
is always appropriate. 


A36 

C: To reward is superiors requiting the meritorious service 
of inferiors. 

E: To reward: Superiors requiting the meritorious service 
of inferiors. 

Comment: There is no E immediately following the head character shang (to 
reward) in the DZ text, but six characters included at the end of A37’s E are given 
here. However, Graham writes: ‘The Canons of A36, 38 have been accidentally 
repeated in the Explanations, no doubt by the scribe who was restoring the 


sequence of the head characters in the dislocated Explanations by comparing them 
with the Canons.’ 


A37 

C: Committing a crime is transgressing a prohibition. 

E: Committing a crime: If no prohibition exists, even if 
there is harm, there is no crime. 

A38 

C: To punish is superiors requiting inferiors for a crime. 
E: To punish: Superiors requiting inferiors for a crime. 

Comment: A38 is a replica of A36 apart from the substitution of fa (punish) and 
zui (crime) for shang (reward) and gong (merit). The four definitions in A35-A38 
should be considered in the light of other texts, including th eXunzi 18.3, the 
Hanfeizi 36, the Zuo Zhuan for Xiang 26 and, of particular note, Mozi 13. 


A39 

C: Being the same includes being different but both being 
the same in one aspect. 

E: Being the same: Two people, yet both see that this is a 
pillar. It is like serving a ruler. 

Comment: C and E have different head characters: the most common approach is 
to emend the tong (ignorant, rude) of E to the tong (the same) of C, as above. Thus 
C and E are interpreted as making somewhat different points: in C, things may be 
called the same if there is identity in one aspect, whereas in E, the sameness is 
reflected in two observers coming to the same judgement about the same thing. 


A40 


C: Time fills up (includes) different periods. 

E: Time: (Includes) past and present, morning and evening. 

Comment: In A40 and A41, it is necessary to emend the head character yu of E. 


A41 

C: Space fills up (includes) different places. 

E: Space: (Includes) east and west, south and north. 

A42 

C: Alimit is a boundary which does not allow any further 
advance by a measured length (a chi). 

E: Alimit: When a boundary does not allow a [further] 
measured length (chi), there is a limit. When a [further] 
measured length (chi) is allowed, there is not a limit. 

A43 

C: Completion (an endpoint) is where there is no aspect 
that is not so. 

E: Completion (an end point): There is only either being at 
rest or being in motion. 

Comment: The head character jin (to complete, exhaust) may be read in 
conjunction with A42 (qiong - limit) or A44 (shi - beginning), as I have done. 


A44 


C: Abeginning is a specific instant of time. 

E: Abeginning: In some cases time has duration and in 
others it does not. Abeginning is a specific instant of time 
without duration. 

Comment: There are problems with the precise reading of dang to qualify shi 
(time). I have taken dang as ‘specific’ or ‘particular’, and ‘a beginning’ to be a 
specific durationless point of time, i.e. there are times with duration and times 
without duration, ‘a beginning’ being a particular example of the latter. 


A45 

C: A transformation is a change of characteristics. 

E: Atransformation: Like a water frog becoming a quail. 

A46 

C: Decrease is apart leaving. 

E: Decrease: Apart is part of a whole. Of its parts, some 
leave and some remain. Decrease is said of what remains. 

Comment: The issue of the part/whole relationship is important to the Later 
Mohists. Thus this statement may be seen as a point of difference between the 
Mohists and the Mingjia (School of Names) on the question of what the ‘decrease’ 
refers to - the part remaining (Mohists) or the whole original object (M ingjia). 


A47 

C: Large increase ...? 

E: None 


Comment: There should be a second C to give the pair sun/yi (decrease/increase). 


A48 

C: In a circle all points are potentially a base. 

E: Circle: All points make contact. 

Comment: A48 is very problematical. In C there are doubts about all three 
characters, and it lacks the final particle ye used in the series A1-A75. In this 
version the point is that while other objects have a particular base, a circle or round 
object does not; each part is equally abase. 


A49 

C: Astorehouse relates to change. 

E: Astorehouse: With a region or cavity like this, the 
appearance is constant. 

Comment: Again the translation is quite tentative: what is stored in a storehouse 
changes, but not the storehouse itself. 


A50 

C: Movement is change of position. 

E: Movement: Non-linear movement is like a door hinge 
avoiding shutting (or, like a door hinge, a hare or a zither). 

Comment: The majority of characters in A50 are controversial; all that can be said 
with assurance is that it is about movement. The emendations in C are widely 
agreed upon, so the definition of movement as a change of position is probably 
acceptable. For E, if there is acceptance that two kinds of movement are being 
indicated, ‘non-linear’ may be acceptable as a characterization of the second kind 


(i.e. the rotation of a door around its hinge), but if three examples are being given 
(door hinge, hare, zither), then the three kinds of movement are linear, rotational and 
oscillatory. Another view is that E differentiates between the movement of 
inanimate and animate objects. Graham has a third interpretation, in part related to 
making the second example the movement of a louse on a hare. 


A51 

C: Stopping is by means of duration. 

E: Stopping: Not stopping when there is no duration 
corresponds to ‘an ox is not a horse’ and is like ‘an arrow 
passing a pillar’. Not stopping when there is duration 
corresponds to ‘a horse is not a horse’ and is like ‘a man 
passing a bridge’. 

Comment: Interpretation hinges on the readings of zhi (to stop) and jiu (time, 
duration), which are recurring characters in Mingjia (School of Names) and Later 
Mohist writings. The crucial question is whether A51 applies to language or to 
motion. In support of language are references to other related uses and the similar 
use of zhi in Gongsun Long’s ‘Discussion of Names and Entities’. For motion, zhi is 
interpreted as ‘opposing force’, making this a relatively clear statement about 
kinetics related to Newton’s Laws. Thus, if there is no opposing force a body 
continues in its state of (rest or) uniform motion, which is easy to understand, 
hence the examples. When there is an opposing force but the body doesn’t stop, 
this is less easy to understand. 


A52 

C: Necessity is not coming to an end. 

E: Necessity: This refers to what can be firmly adhered to. 
For example, in the case of younger and older brothers, one 


is so and one isn’t. Necessary and not necessary apply in 
one case and not in the other, and affirm or deny necessity. 

Comment: There are significant problems in interpretation. A52 may relate to the 
Hegelian dialectic, i.e. an identification of thesis, antithesis and synthesis. 


A53 

C: To be level is to be at the same height. 

E: None 

Comment: There is no E for ping (level, peace), which may be due to the clarity of 
the C; however, there are two possible uses of ping, the second being exemplified by 
the Analects XIII.7. 


A54 

C: The same length is when [two things] ‘use each other up’ 
with their straightness (i.e. when their straightness is 
identical). 

E: The same [length]: The door-post and the door frame are 
of the same length. 


A55 

C: The centre is [established by] equal lengths. 

E: The centre: From the centre outwards the distances are 
the same. 

Comment: One point of variance is whether A55 refers specifically to the radius of 
a circle or more generally to various geometrical figures, most simply, a straight line. 


A56 


C: Thickness is to have magnitude (largeness). 

E: Thickness: Only what is without thickness is what does 
not have magnitude. 


A57 

C: The sun at noon is directly south. 

E: None 

Comment: ‘Noon’ is a reading of rizhong, which is, in fact, the modem term. An 
expanded version might read: ‘The shadow of the sun at the centre (noon) points 
directly south and north.’ 


A58 

C: Straight is to be aligned (upright). 

E: None 

Comment: There are several interpretations of can (the second character) with 
reference to its use in other texts: to read it as ‘aligned’; to understand it as ‘upright’ 
or ‘vertical’, but this borders on the tautological unless related to the gnomon and 
possibly linked to A57’s C; or to regard it as something to do with ‘three’. 


A59 

C: Acircle has the same lengths from one centre. 

E: Acircle: Apair of compasses describes until the line 
joins. 


Comment: A59 is about the features of a circle, i.e. a single centre and a 
circumference on which each point is equidistant from the central point (equal radii), 
and its construction. 


A60 

C: Asquare is where the sides and angles are four and 
regular (equal). 

E: Asquare: Acarpenter’s square establishes the meeting 
points. 

Comment: A60 should be the equivalent for a square to A59 (circle), but the 
majority of its characters are more or less contentious. Some editors simply provide 
a close equivalent to A59, substituting the carpenter’s square for a pair of 
compasses. However, Graham’s view is that what is being conveyed is that the 
formation of a circle or square by the implements indicated is only rough and he 
relates this to Paradox 13 of the second list (i.e. Carpenters’ squares are not 
accurate; compasses can’t make circles). This is facilitated by emending the 
penultimate character of C from huan (to bawl) to quan in the sense of deng (equal 
to). On the paradox, see Fung Mi-lan, History of Chinese Philosophy, vol. 1, trans. 
D. Bodde (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1952), pp. 217-18). 


A61 

C: To double is to make two. 

E: To double: 2 chi (units of length) and 1 chi [differ] only 
in doing away with 1 chi. 


A62 


C: Astarting point is a part which is without thickness and 
is the very foremost. 

E: Astarting point: This has nothing the same as it. (This is 
unique.) 

Comment: The primary issue is the precise meaning of the head character duan. Is 
it a ‘point’ in general, equivalent to dian; is it an ‘extreme point’, i.e. ‘beginning’ or 
‘end’, as would accord with usage in Doctrine of the Mean 6 and Analects IX.7; or is 
it the ‘startingpoint’ only, as would accord with its description as ‘the very 
foremost’? 


A63 

C: Having a space/interval is not reaching to the centre. 

E: Having a space/interval: Said of what is at the sides 
(flanking). 

Comment: This translation depends on Graham’s addition of bu ji (not reach to) to 
C (and in A64’s C). Without this, it would read: a space is what is between two 
things. 


A64 

C: The space/interval does not reach the sides. 

E: The space/interval: Said of what is flanked. A chi (line) 
is before in relation to a plane surface and after in relation 
to a point, but is not flanked by a point and a plane surface. 

A65 

C: With king-posts there is an empty space between. 


E: King-posts: The empty space is between the two pieces 
of wood and refers to what is without wood. 


Comment: There are two views on hr. the first requires emending lu (thread) to lu 
(king-post), while the second retains lu (thread) and emends mu (wood). In the first, 
the meaning is ‘king-post’, a short square wooden post used in roof construction: 
the space between king-posts is without wood and is empty. For either argument, 
A65 is again about the ‘space between’. 


A66 

C: To fill is for there not not to be. 

E: To fill: Not to fill is being without thickness 
(dimensionless). Inn chi (line) there is nowhere to go to 
where you don’t get two. 

Comment: There is some variation in the reading in C of the head character ying. 
Thus Liang Qichao writes: ‘ Ying is han (to contain). For example, a body “contains” 
surfaces; surfaces “contain” lines; lines “contain” points. Whatever contains, 
necessarily completely contains what it contains. Therefore it is said “not not to 
have” ’ (Mojing Jiaoshi, MZJC 19). I have used ying in the sense of ‘fill’. E is much 
more problematic, in both structure and inteipretation, and is closely linked to A67; 
there are at least four distinct versions of both. 


A67 

C: Hard and white do not exclude each other. 

E: Hard [and white]: Different positions do not fill each 
other. Not being each other - this is excluding each other. 

Comment: Important Later Mohist terms are involved, in particularjwzg (contain 
or fill) and hou (thickness or substance). It is generally agreed that A66 and A67 are 


part of the Later Mohist response to the arguments of Gonggun Long in ‘On Hard 
and White’. Graham, who considers this essay to be a late forgery, rejects this view. 


A68 

C: To coincide is both obtaining (occupying the same 
space). 

E: To coincide: With a line and a line, the coincidence of 
both is not complete. With a point and a point, the 
coincidence of both is complete. With a line and a point, 
the coinciding is complete in respect to one and 
incomplete in respect to the other. Tire coinciding of hard 
and white is mutually complete. The coinciding of parts is 
not mutually complete. 

Comment: There is widespread agreement involving the interpretation of the head 
character ying (which also appears in A69 and A70): two lines do not, with one 
theoretical exception, occupy the same space, whereas two points do; and the case 
of a line and a point is also given. The qualities of hard and white in a body are 
spatially coextensive, whereas two individual bodies cannot occupy the same space. 
A68 links the geometric definitions with the hard and white argument. 


A69 

C: In comparing, there is some respect in which [two 
things] coincide and there is [some respect in which] they 
don’t coincide. 

E: In comparing: Only if the two have a (common) starting 
point is it possible. 


Comment: Interpretation centres around what figures are being compared, about 
what ‘two’ refers to, and about the head character of E, resulting in different detailed 
analyses being given involving lines, rectangles or triangles. If lines are the subject, 
Hang (two) refers to the two lines being compared and duan to the common starting 
point. 


A70 

C: Aseries is where there is no interval (space) but no 
coinciding. 

E: Aseries: Only possible if there is no piling up. 

Comment: In C there is universal acceptance of the emendation of the first ying (of 
two consecutively) to xiang (mutual); the second ying is rendered here as ‘coincide’. 
In E the proposed emendation of the second hou (thickness) - i.e. the penultimate 
character - to hou (afterwards) is more contentious; perhaps the clearest exposition 
is: if two or more lines are joined end to end precisely, there is no space between 
them and no coincidence/overlap. There is, moreover, no ‘pilingup’ or ‘thickness’, 
i.e. no hou. 


A71 

C: Astandard is what something complies with and is so. 

E: Astandard: Tire concept, apair of compasses and a 
circle are three things which, when they combine together, 
may make a standard (i.e. a circle). 

Comment: The issue in E is whether all three (the concept, the compasses and the 
circle) are necessary standards jointly for the construction of a circle, or whether 
each individually may be taken as a standard. 


A72 



C: Areplica (duplicate) is that which is ‘in accord’. 

E: Areplica (duplicate): With regard to that which is ‘in 
accord’, it is people complying with standards (laws). 

Comment: The issue with C is the head character er , which is also the subject of 
A15. Here early commentators relate it to Guo Pu’s commentary (SSJZS) on the 
ancient dictionary, the Erya, as er (two), which some modem Chinese 
commentators equate with fuben in the sense of ‘duplicate’, and I have followed 
this. Thus fa (the head character of A71) is the standard or model, and er is the 
replica or duplicate. 


A73 

C: Explanation is the means by which clarification is 
effected. 

E: None 

Comment: On the head character shuo, Graham writes: ‘To “explain” ( shuo) in the 
dialectical chapters ... is nearly always to offer proofs; indeed, there is no other 
word for demonstration in the vocabulary.’ 


A74 

C: The other is not admissible; two are not admissible. 

E: The other: Everything is either ‘ox’ or ‘not-ox’. It is like 
a hinge. There are just the two possibilities - there is no 
way to deny (this). 

Comment: The head character of C has been emended from you (past, towards) to 
bi in its most commonly accepted sense of ‘that’ or ‘the other’, although its 
particular relationship to shi (this), as in the Zhuangzi 2, and one commentator’s 
observations about the distinction between subject and object, with bi representing 


the latter, must be borne in mind. Chmielewski makes valid and interesting points: C 
is the Mohist response to DengXi’s ‘peculiar theory and practice’ of‘both are 
admissible’ (Hang kezhi shuo ), and that it is ‘the most general and the most explicit 
statement (in metalogjcal terms) of the conjunction of the laws of non-contradiction 
and of excluded middle which the Chinese ever made until modem times’ (see his 
‘Notes on Early Chinese Logic VI’). The translation of E is related particularly to 
the Zhuangzi 2 (Guo Qingfan, Zhuangzi Jishi, vol. 1, p. 66 note 10). The definition 
of bi is important in relation both to other C&Es (including A75), and to other 
writings such as the Gongsun Longzi. 


A75 

C: Making a distinction is contending about ‘that’ (an 
object or entity). The distinction prevails which fits the 
facts. 

E: Making a distinction: One says it is ox; one says it is not 
ox. This is contending about ‘that’ (the object or entity). 
Both do not fit the facts. When both don’t fit the facts, one 
necessarily doesn’t fit the facts. An example of not fitting 
the facts is dog. 

Comment: See A74 and also Mozi 45.1. 


A76 

C: In doing (wet"), there are limits to knowledge and 
dependence on desire. 

E: In doing [something] ( wei ): If you desire to preserve 
your finger but knowledge does not know this is harmful, 
this is the fault of knowledge. If you have knowledge and 


this is carefully applied, you do not overlook the harm 
involved in it. If you still desire to preserve it, you must 
suffer the harm. It is the same with eating dried meat. The 
benefit or harm of rank meat cannot be known so, if you 
desire to eat the dried meat although it is rank, this is not to 
let what you doubt put a stop to what you desire. Tire 
benefit or harm of what is beyond the wall cannot be known 
so, if by running to it you obtain money but you do not run, 
this is to let what you doubt put a stop to what you desire. 
Consider the principle: ‘In doing [something] there is a 
limit to knowledge and a dependence on desire.’ One may 
eat dried meat and not be wise; one may preserve one’s 
finger and not be foolish. That which one does and that 
which one does not do both involve doubt and cannot be 
[completely] planned for. 

Comment: If the reading of the unknown Mohist character (fifth character in C) is 
xuan (hang, suspend) in the sense of ‘depend on’, the meaning is clear. Some modern 
commentators see the reference as being specifically to ‘bad conduct’, and it is 
certainly a statement about the contributions of knowledge and desire to conduct, 
although whether it should be framed in conditional or assertive form is not so clear. 
The three examples in E also seem clear and appear to favour a conditional 
formulation of C: if in a certain situation knowledge is limited, then conduct is 
determined by desire. 


All 



C: Yi [may mean] to complete or bring about ( cheng ) or to 
go away, perish or be lost ( wang ). 

E: K: In the case of making a garment, it is completed. In 
the case of curing an illness, it goes away. 

Comment: This is the start of a series of C&Es (A77-A88) of a particular form, 
i.e. terms without any sentence formation and without the final particle ye. They 
aim to clarify the first term, i.e. the head character which is used as such in E. The 
form of C may be the same throughout, but the nature of the explication varies. 
Graham writes: ‘Although the series is most conveniently treated as an appendix to 
the definitions ... it also serves as a bridge to the theses ... ’ 


A78 

C: Shi [may mean] to tell (wei) or to cause ( gu ). 

E: Shi: To give an order is to tell but what is ordered 
doesn’t necessarily come about. To make damp is to cause 
and necessarily depends on what is done coming about. 

A79 

C: Ming (a name) [may be] generalizing (da), classifying 
(lei) or particularizing (si). 

E: Ming (a name): ‘Tiling’ is generalizing. If there is an 
entity, it necessarily gets this name. Naming it ‘horse’ is 
classifying. If it is an entity like this, it is necessarily 
named by this. Naming someone Zang is particularizing. 
This name stops at (is limited to) this entity. Hie words 


issuing from the mouth are all names - like the pairing of 
surname and style. 


A80 

C: Wei (to say, refer) [may be] to transfer (yi), to 
refer/raise/pick out (ju) or to apply/add (/7a). 

E: Wei (to say, refer): To call a pup a dog is to transfer. (To 
call something) ‘pup’ or ‘dog’ is to refer/raise/pick out. 
Scolding a pup is to apply/add. 

A81 

C: Zhi (knowing) [is by] hearing (wen), explaining (shuo) 
and personally experiencing (c/in)', (it is about) names 
(ming), entities (shi), correlations (he) and actions (wei). 
E: Zhi (knowing): Receiving something transmitted is 
hearing. The method not being obstructed is explaining. 
Observing (something) oneself is personally experiencing. 
What something is called by is its name. What is called [by 
the name] is the entity. The pairing of name and entity is 
correlation. Intentions that are carried out are actions. 

A82 

C: Wen (to hear) is by transmission (i.e. from someone 
else) or in person. 


E: Wen (to hear): Someone informing about it is ‘by 
transmission’. Being present oneself is ‘in person’. 

A83 

C: Jian (to see) is partial or complete. 

E: Jian (to see): [Seeing] one aspect is ‘partial’. [Seeing] 
two (all) aspects is ‘complete’. 

A84 

C: He (to relate to/to tally with/to correspond) includes 
being correct (exact), being fitting (appropriate) and being 
necessary. 

E: He (to relate to/to tally with/to correspond): To deploy 
troops, to return to the centre, and realizing intentions 
involve being correct. Zang’s conduct involves being 
fitting. Negating ‘that’ means it is necessarily not so; this 
involves being necessary. (Hie judgements of sages, 
employ but do not treat as necessary. Tlie ‘necessary’, 
accept and do not doubt. Hie ones which are the converse 
of each other, apply to both sides, not to one without the 
other.) 

Comment: E might reasonably be deemed incomprehensible, but it is probable that 
the three aspects of he, identified in C, are being exemplified. The variety of 
proposed emendations, readings and punctuation to the first example attest to its 
obscurity. The translation of the second and third examples (i.e. being fitting and 



being necessary) is also very difficult. I have included Graham’s version of the 
problematical eighteen characters in parentheses at the end of E, but see Johnston, 
Mozi, p. 448. 


A85 

C: To desire is to directly (correctly) weigh the benefit. 
Moreover to abhor is to directly (correctly) weigh the 
harm. 

E: None 

Comment: A85 appears to be out of context here, and there is uncertainty as to 
whether there is an E or not. This version follows the DZ text apart from the 
substitution of the standard form of zheng (correctly) for the rare ‘early’. Also, qie 
(moreover) is contentious. Some omit it; Graham retains it and translates it as 
‘about to’, which is an alternative meaning of yu (to desire). 


A86 

C: Wei (being/becoming) [includes] to be (exist), to cease 
to be (exist), to exchange, to disperse, to put in order, to 
transform. 

E: Wei (being/becoming): Armour and towers exist. A 
sickness ceases to exist. Buying and selling are exchanges. 
Mist and ashes disperse. Complying and directing bring 
order. The tree frog and field mouse are transformed. 

Comment: The headword wei (defined in A76 as ‘in doing something’) is read here 
in the senses of both ‘being’ and ‘becoming’. E is bedevilled by textual and 
interpretative problems, and does not clarify wei. 


A87 


C: Tong (the same) [may involve] being duplicated, being a 
part, being together or being of a class. 

E: Tong (the same): Two names for one entity is the 
sameness of duplication. Not being outside the whole is the 
sameness of being a part. Both being situated in the room is 
the sameness of being together. Being the same in some 
respect is the sameness of being of a class. 

Comment: Most commentators provide illustrative examples for E: the first is 
almost invariably pup/dog and the second refers to the part/whole issue as in A2. 
The variation in the third example largely depends on how literally shi is 
interpreted: if as ‘house’ or ‘room’, e.g. as in 44.13, relating to a robber in a house; 
or more generally as suo in the sense of ‘location’. 


A88 

C: Yi (different) [includes] two, not being apart, not being 
together, and not being of a class. 

E: Yi (different): Two certainly being different is two. Not 
being joined is not being a part. Not being in the same place 
is not being together. Not having what is the same is not 
being of a class. 


A89 

C: Sameness and difference are interrelated [and are 
determined by] comparing what things have and do not have. 


E: Sameness and difference are interrelated: In the case of 
a rich family and intuitive knowledge, there is having and 
not having. In the case of comparing and measuring, there is 
much and little. In the case of snakes and earthworms, there 
is turning and circling, going away and approaching. In the 
case of a bird flying or a beetle moving, there is hard and 
soft, hi the case of sword and armour, there is death and 
life. In the case of two sons and a mother under one roof, 
there is older and younger. In the case of two, one 
decisively prevails, as in black and white, or centre and 
sides, hi discussion, conduct, learning and entities, there is 
right and wrong. In the case of the Nan bird roosting, there 
is becoming and not (becoming). In the case of older and 
younger brother, there is together and opposing. In the case 
of the body being in one place but the mind being 
elsewhere, there is present and absent. In the case of a 
crane or monkey, there is what is innate and what is 
acquired (caused). In the case of the price being right, there 
is dear and cheap. In jumping over a wall, there is moving 
and stopping. 

Comment: A89 is very problematical, as are A90-A99. In C I have read fang (the 
fifth character) as bi (to compare), the point being that the paired terms tong (the 
same) and yi (different) are comparable to the paired terms you (have, are) and wu 
(not have, are not), or that sameness and difference are determined by comparing 
what things have and do not have, i.e. sameness and difference depend on some 


quality or aspect being present or not, which is a clear and unexceptionable 
proposition. 


A90 

C: Hearing is the listening of the ear. 
E: None 


A91 

C: To follow what is heard and get to its meaning is the 
discernment of the mind. 

E: None 


A92 

C: To speak is the benefit provided by the mouth. 
E: None 


A93 

C: To grasp what is said and its meaning being understood 
is the discrimination of the mind. 

E: None 

Comment: On the use of bian (discrimination) here, Graham notes that it is ‘the 
only example in the corpus of bian as a quality of mind, “subtle in making 
distinctions, logical in ordering ideas” ... ’ 


A 94 


C: Assenting does not have [just] one benefit or use. 

E: Assenting: Both agreeing, both rejecting, knowing 
beforehand, asserting, allowing the possibility are the five 
(forms of assent). Long and short, before and after, light 
and heavy are adducing. 


A95 

C: To be convinced about something, one must grasp the 
subtle turns of the description and then seek their reasons. 
E: To be convinced in grasping something is difficult to 
achieve, hi speaking, the important task is to complete the 
grasping, then to seek the reasons behind the grasping. 

A96 

C: Where the model (standard) is the same, look at its 
sameness (what is the same in it). 

E: Model (standard): Select what is the same and look at 
subtle variations. 

Comment: A96 and A97 are a pair of C&Es on the use of a standard, model or 
criterion. 


A97 

C: Where the model (standard) is different examine its 
appropriateness. 


E: Amodel (standard): Select this, pick out that; ask about 
cause, look at appropriateness. Use a person’s being dark 
and a person’s not being dark to establish the limit of ‘dark 
person’, and a person having love towards others and a 
person not having love towards others to establish the limit 
of ‘loving person’. In the case of these, what is appropriate? 

Comment: One issue in E is whether the character hei (dark or black) should be 
read as, or emended to, mo with the same meaning, but referring to Master Mo 
himself. 


A98 

C: Stopping occurs because there is already resolution of 
the argument. 

E: Stopping: If ‘that’ is raised as being so and taken as the 
ground for ‘this’ being so, then raise what is not so and 
question (clarify) it. 

Comment: Some editors add A98’s C to A97’s C and proceed directly to A99, 
while others emend the head character to zheng (correct), although this 
interpretation is not greatly different from that usually given for zhi, when this is 
read as a means of resolving disputation. 


A99 

C: What is correct cannot be negated. 

E: The correct: For example, ‘sage’ is negatable and not 
negatable. Being correct in the five assents is when all 
people have in their minds an explanation. Being wrong in 


the five assents (like a circle not being a straight line) is 
when there is no explanation. Use the five assents as if they 
were naturally so. 

Comment: Graham makes major emendations so the subject becomes ‘matching 
and assent’, while others emend and arrange so the sage is an infallible arbiter of shi 
and fei (right and wrong), a point which E amplifies by stating that even when he 
seems wrong he is not. 

Immediately prior to A99’s C is the statement: ‘read this text horizontally’ (instead 
of vertically as was customary). This is almost certainly a late addition and was an 
important clue in deciphering the C&Es. 


41 and 43 


Canons and Explanations B 
(Jing and Jing Shuo Xia) 


B1 

C: Stopping is effected by means of classes. The 
explanation lies in sameness. 

E: Stopping: Another, on the basis of these being so, says 
this is so. I, on the basis of these not being so, call in 
question this being so. 

Comment: The variations in the reading of the head character zhi (to stop) include 
‘putting a stop to disputation’ (used here), ‘fixing the class’, ‘the permanence of 
classes’, or even reading it as zheng (to correct, rectify). The subject is clearly 
classes (as in B2, B6 and B12, for example). 


B2 

C: Making inferences about classes is difficult. The 
explanation lies in their being large or small (in scope). 


E: In speaking of four-footed animals, they are different 
from ox and horse, and different from the totality of things, 
being a larger (class than the former) and a smaller (class 
than the latter). If these being so meant that this was 
necessarily so, then all would be confused. 

B3 

C: Things ‘use up’ the same name. (For example,) ‘to be in 
two minds’ and ‘to contend’, [‘to nurture’ and] ‘to love’, ‘to 
eat’ and ‘to call’, ‘being white’ and ‘being blind’, ‘being 
beautiful’ and [‘being cruel’], ‘man’ and ‘sandals’. If one of 
the pair is set aside, in naming it, it is what it inherently is. 
The explanation lies in the reason/criterion. 

E: Tire same name: Both ‘contend’ but not both ‘are in two 
minds’ is the example of ‘being in two minds’ and ‘to 
contend’. One’s offspring and one’s liver and lungs are 
related to ‘nurture’ and ‘love’. Mao and mao are for 
‘feeding’ and ‘calling’ respectively. Most of a white horse 
is white, most of a blind horse is not blind; this is ‘white’ 
and ‘blind’. Being termed li does not necessarily mean 
beauty; being termed bao does not necessarily mean cruel. 
Being deemed ‘wrong’ by others is not being ‘wrong’. 

Being deemed ‘a brave man’ is not being deemed ‘a man’. 
Being deemed ‘shoes’ when linked in ‘buying clothes’ is 
being ‘shoes’; this is ‘man’ and ‘shoes’. If one of two is 



lost, it is not joined with the one remaining. If a part is 
gone, it is not there. What is there is the entity, and 
afterwards one speaks of it. What is not an entity is not 
spoken of. It is not like ‘flower’ and ‘beautiful’. If one 
speaks of ‘this’, then ‘this’ is inherently beautiful. If one 
speaks of something else, then ‘this’ is not beautiful. If one 
does not speak of it, then it is reported on. 

Comment: Does wu jin, which I have taken as the first two characters, belong here 
or to the end of B2’s C? Another issue is whether the several additions (included 
here) should be made to complete the series of pairs. Also, should the last twelve 
characters in C (the final two sentences) be included here or be treated as a separate 
C? The sense of B3 seems to be about the usage of terms and their various 
applications in different circumstances. The problems with E are the uncertainty 
about the initial statement and the terse nature of the examples. 


B4 

C: Even where it is not possible to set aside a part, there 
are two. The explanation lies in ‘seen and not-seen’, ‘one 
and two’, ‘length and breadth’. 

E: ?: The seen and the not-seen are separate; one and two 
do not fill each other; length and breadth; hard and white. 

Comment: B4 continues the discussion of part and whole and relates particularly 
to Gongsun Long’s ‘hard and white’ argument. Quite different views have been 
advanced: an anti-Gongsun Long position, which depends critically on one critical 
emendation (making bu (a negative) the head character in E); supporting Gongsun 
Long or the extreme position taken by Graham, who considers B4 to be the basis 
for the supposed forgery of ‘On Hard and White’ in the Gongsun Longzi 3. 


B5 


C: Not being able and yet not being harmful. Hie 
explanation lies in harmful. 

E: Not: Lifting a weight is not equivalent to lifting a 
needle, which is not the strength’s responsibility. Taking 
counters that are grasped to be odd or even is not the 
intellect’s responsibility. It is like ears and eyes. 

Comment: The issue for C is the context: it has been equated with Mencius 
IIIA.4(6), where the point is that each person has a particular competency that is 
appropriate. The examples in E are somewhat unclear, in part due to textual 
uncertainty. Influenced particularly by the final statement, most commentators take 
B5, like B4, to be related to Gongsun Long’s ‘On Hard and White’. 


B6 

C: Different classes are not comparable. Hie explanation 
lies in measurement. 

E: Difference: Of wood and night, which is the longer? Of 
knowledge and grain, which is the greater? Of the four 
things - rank, family, good conduct and price - which is the 
most valuable? Of the tailed deer and the crane, which is 
the higher? Of the cicada and the zither, which is the more 
mournful? 

Comment: The issue in C is the reading of bi (the fourth character), usually 
understood as bi (to compare). The point then is that things of different classes 
cannot be compared in terms of measurement in that although the same adjective 
may be used, the application is clearly different - as with the length of time and 
space, to use the first example. 


B7 


C: In a part going away there is no adding or subtracting. 
The explanation lies in the original. 

E: Part: In both being one there is no change. 

Comment: Terseness of expression in E, together with variation in C’s readings of 
jia shao (fourth and fifth characters) and gw (eighth character) - ‘adding or 
subtracting’ and ‘original’, respectively - allows a range of interpretation. For 
example, one commentator suggests a beautiful flower: the flower remaining when 
‘beautiful’ is taken away. Another refers to B4, and via this to Gongsun Long’s ‘On 
Hard and White’ (Gongsun Longzi 3), while still another brackets B4, B5 and B8 as 
being about using pian gw (a part going away) to clarify the phrase ming shi tong 
bian (names and entities undergo change) in the three different situations, relating 
B7 to Gongsun Long’s ‘Understanding Change’ (Gongsun Longzi 4). 


B8 

C: What is false is certainly erroneous (contradictory). The 
explanation lies in not being so. 

E: False: False is necessarily wrong and only then is false. 
‘Dog’ is falsely taken as being ‘crane’; like a family name is 
‘crane’. 


B9 

C: With respect to a thing, there is how it is so, how it is 
known and how to cause another to know it. These are not 
necessarily the same. The explanation lies in illness. 


E: A thing: Someone wounding him is how it is so. Seeing 
it is knowing [it]. Informing them is causing [others] to 
know. 

Comment: The only real issue concerns what bu bi tong (not necessarily the same) 
refers to in C. There are three possibilities: that the difference is between the three 
circumstances stated, which might be important for the Later Mohists to stress; 
that the phrase refers to each individually, e.g., in the case of an illness, it may come 
about in different ways, its recognition may be by different means and informing 
someone about it may be done in different ways (this seems the most plausible); 
and the third, and intermediate, position is that while a thing is how it is, how it is 
known and how someone is informed about it may both differ, which may refer to 
Zhuangzi 13 and the discussion between Duke Huan and Wheelwright Pian. 


BIO 

C: Where there is doubt the explanation lies in ‘coming 
upon’ (feng ), ‘following’ (xun), ‘meeting with’ (yu) and 
‘being past’ ( guo ). 

E: Doubt: If one comes upon someone engaged in affairs, 
then one takes him to be an officer. If one comes upon an 
ox in a shelter, then one takes the summer to be cold. This 
is ‘coming upon’. If one raises it, it is light; if one casts it 
away, it is heavy - like stone and feathers. It is not that 
there is strength. A wooden writing strip follows paring. 
This is not skill. This is ‘following’. Whether the 
concealment of contention is through the drinking of wine 
or the conduct of business cannot be known. This is 



‘meeting with’. Is it known? Is it through already being so? 
This is ‘being past’. 

Comment: It is agreed that the subject is ‘doubt’ or ‘difficulty’, and that three 
instances are to do with the present and the fourth with the past. 


Bll 

C: Combining joins ones; there is either doubling or there 
is not. The explanation lies in the opposition. 

E: None 

Comment: One issue is what the combining {he) refers to: ‘forces’ (li) or geometry. 
Graham, however, understands it as being about words, and makes a major 
modification of C and adds an E, constructed in part from B43’s E. Another reading 
is to group it under Logic, but this does not attempt to specify precisely what is 
combined and sees the final character as ‘contradiction’ or ‘conflict’. 


B12 

C: Demarcated things are one unit. The explanation lies in 
both being one, and specifically this [one thing], 

E: Both: Both being one. For example [both] ox and horse 
have four feet. Being specifically this fits [both] ox and 
horse. If you count oxen and you count horses, then ox and 
horse are two. If you count ox-horse, then ox and horse are 
one. It is like counting fingers; the fingers are five yet the 
five are one. 


B13 


C: Space involves movement in location. The explanation 
lies in length in terms of both extension and duration 
(space and time). 

E: Length: There is movement in space and there is 
position (rest) - (this is) space. Space is north and south at 
sunrise and also at sunset - (this is) space moving in time. 

Comment: The key issue for C is whether yu jiu (the final two characters) is 
included in it (as above) or not. This in turn determines where the break is made in 
E. On the grounds that it is reasonable to maintain consistency with A40 and A41 
regardingyYw (time, duration) and yu (space), respectively, the interpretation of B13 
here is that change of position takes place in space and has ‘length’ (chang), but also 
involves ‘length’ of time, the connection being illustrated by the linking of north and 
south (space) with sunrise and sunset (time). 


B14 

C: Not hard and white. Hie explanation lies in (no duration 
and extension). 

E: None 


B15 

C: Hard and white. The explanation lies in interdependence. 
E: Touching hard, one obtains white; they necessarily 
mutually fill. 

Comment: Some commentators merge B14 and B15, but others see them on the 
basis of a very similar interpretation as statements of the Gongsun Long and Later 
Mohist positions, respectively, with the final six characters in B14 (the final 
sentence) offering an explanation of why the Gongsun Long position is wrong, 


while B15 as a whole supports the Later Mohist position. It is the distinction 
between ‘separating the hard and white’ (Gongsun Long) and ‘the hard and white 
filling’ (Later Mohists), or in more general terms, between the separate existence of 
the qualities (the idealist position) and their necessary dependence on the object 
(the materialist position). 


B16 

C: ‘Placing’ what is not yet so in relation to what is so. The 
explanation lies in its being what is so (in this). 

E: ‘Placing’: [To say that] Yao was skilled at ruling is to 
examine the past from the perspective of the present. If one 
examines the present from the perspective of the past, Yio 
would not be able to rule. 

Comment: The problems in C are the reading of the head character zai, the word 
order in the last part of the first sentence and whether the final two characters are 
included. There is broad agreement about the meaning: making inferences regarding 
what is not yet so, on the basis of what is already so, and E introduces the issue of 
perspective, in this case temporal. Seen from the standpoint of the present, Yao was 
a skilled ruler in his time, but would not (necessarily) be so at the present - 
different times, different circumstances. 


B17 

C: Ashadow does not move. Hie explanation lies in change 
taking place. 

E: Ashadow: When the light arrives, the shadow 
disappears. If it stays, it remains indefinitely. 


Comment: Although all commentators offer their analysis of B17-B24 on optics, 
some have a detailed treatment with diagrammatic representations. The main issue 
with B17 is whether it is a statement in agreement with apparently similar 
statements in the Zhuangzi 33 and the Liezi 4 (A. C. Graham, The Book ofLieh-tzu 
(London: John Murray, I960)), or in opposition. My view is that this is a 
clarification of the common-sense position and a demystification of the apparent 
paradox. 


B18 

C: When a shadow is two the explanation lies in 
doubleness. 

E: A shadow: Two lights double one light and the shadow 
produced by one light. 

Comment: Several proposals have been made so that B18 says more than the 
trivial point that two shadows mean two light sources. If xia (to double) is read as 
‘to flank’, the second light does not obliterate the shadow from the first light, as 
might be assumed from B17. Thus B18 means that when two light sources 
illuminate one object, there are two shadows not one, the darker representing the 
area which the object shadows from both light sources and the lighter the area which 
the object shadows from each light source individually. 


B19 

C: Tire image (shadow) being inverted depends on there 
being an aperture at the cross-over and the image (shadow) 
being distant. Hie explanation lies in the aperture. 

E: Hie image (shadow): The light reaches the person 
shining like an arrow. The lowest [light] that reaches the 
person is the highest [in the image] and the highest [light] 


that reaches the person is the lowest [in the image]. The 
feet conceal the lowest light and therefore become the 
image (shadow) at the top. The head conceals the highest 
light and therefore becomes the image (shadow) at the 
bottom. This is because either far or near there is an 
aperture with light in it, therefore the image (shadow) turns 
around within it. 

Comment: C is a description of the pinhole camera or camera obscura, with the 
formation of an inverted image. In E, there are difficulties in the initial statement 
which are variously dealt with but the basic meaning is not changed. 


B20 

C: Tire shadow ‘meets’ the sun. The explanation lies in 
reflection. 

E: The shadow: When the sun’s light returns to illuminate 
the person, the shadow is situated between the sun and the 
person. 

Comment: The assumption is that a plane mirror is being referred to, although it 
would seem that any reflective surface would suffice. 


B21 

C: Ashadow’s (image’s) being small or large depends on 
whether (the object) is oblique or upright, far or near. 

E: A shadow (image): When the post is oblique the shadow 
is short and broad whereas, when the post is upright, the 



shadow (image) is long and narrow. When the light source 
is smaller than the post, the shadow (image) is larger than 
the post and vice versa (and not only in the case of small). 
With far and near ... 

Comment: Several characters are contentious and the final part of E is quite 
possibly mutilated. Fei du xiaoye (and not only in the case of the small) indicates 
the converse of the preceding example, while the situation in respect to ‘near’ and 
‘far’ is implied but left unstated. 


B22 

C: When something is near a mirror and upright, the image 
(shadow) is reversed. There are many and yet they are like 
few. The explanation lies in the small surface. 

E: Near: In a plane mirror the image (shadow) is small. 
Form and appearance, brightness and darkness, far and near, 
oblique and upright, are opposite to the illuminated 
[object]. The mirror faces and the image (shadow) doubles. 
In coming towards and going away there is also facing and 
doubling, the doubling using the ‘back’. With respect to the 
mirror, its post is in the mirror and there is nothing which 
is not mirror. The image’s (shadow’s) post is without 
number, and necessarily exceeds the upright. Therefore in 
the same place its body is double; nevertheless, the mirror 
separates. 

Comment: There are three distinct views on this C&E: two plane mirrors placed 
together at different angles; perspective, specifically the appearances when someone 


stands on a horizontal plane reflecting surface; and reflection at curved surfaces. 


B23 

C: In a concave mirror there are two images; one is small 
and changed (inverted) and one is large and upright. The 
explanation lies in whether [the object] is outside or inside 
the centre [of curvature]. 

E: Amirror: When the object is within the centre and 
approaches the centre, what is mirrored becomes larger and 
the image also becomes larger. When it moves away from 
the centre, what is mirrored becomes smaller and the 
image also becomes smaller, yet necessarily upright. 
Arising at the centre is the cause of being upright and 
extending its vertical [height]. When the object is outside 
the centre and approaches the centre, what is mirrored 
becomes larger and the image also becomes larger. When it 
moves away from the centre, what is mirrored becomes 
smaller and the image also becomes smaller, and 
necessarily changed (inverted). Converging at the centre is 
the cause of [the image] being changed and extending its 
vertical [height]. 

Comment: Accepting that B23 is about reflection from a concave surface depends 
on several emendations or particular interpretations. There are also problems with 
the first half of E, dealing with an object within the focal point or centre of 
curvature. 


B24 


C: In a convex mirror the image (shadow) is smaller in one 
case and larger in the other, but is invariably upright. The 
explanation lies in what is appropriate. 

E: [Convex] mirror: When the object is near, what is 
mirrored is large and the image is also large. When it is 
distant, what is mirrored is small and the image is also 
small and invariably upright. When the image (shadow) 
goes beyond what is normal, it is caused to be indistinct. 

Comment: There is widespread agreement that B24 is about reflection at a convex 
surface, which is appropriate as the last of a series (B22-B24) dealing with 
reflection at plane, concave and convex surfaces, respectively. 


B25 

C: Bearing and not inclining. lire explanation lies in ‘being 
equal to’. 

E: Bearing: In the case of a horizontal piece of wood, if a 
weight is added to it and it does not incline, the 
counterweight ‘is equal to’ the weight. If the point of 
suspension of the counterweight is moved to the right, and 
without adding to it, it does incline, the counterweight ‘is 
not equal to’ the weight. When horizontal, if a weight is 
added to one of its sides, it necessarily inclines 
downwards, the counterweight and the weight 
corresponding (i.e. prior to the addition). When both are 


horizontal, the ‘root’ is short and the ‘branch’ is long. When 
the two are added to with equivalent weights, the ‘branch’ 
necessarily falls, as it acquires the ‘force’. 

Comment: There is an issue as to whether this should be divided into two C&Es. 
What does seem clear is that B25 is about the principles of the lever, horizontal 
beam or steelyard in terms of moments of force. 


B26 

C: Raising and lowering are in opposition. Hie explanation 
lies in compelling (force). 

E: Raising: In raising, there is force; in lowering, there is 
no force. It is not necessary that what raises it stops in 
action (is direct or oblique). The rope restrains raising it; it 
is like an awl piercing it. In lifting, what is long and heavy 
descends, what is short and light ascends. What ascends 
increasingly gains; what descends increasingly loses. If the 
rope is straight and the counterweight and weight are alike, 
then it is in balance. In lowering, what ascends increasingly 
loses, what descends increasingly gains. Ascending 
involves the counterweight, the weight then completely 
falling. 

Comment: Is B26 entirely about pulleys, or entirely about levers, or are a number 
of different situations being considered? I favour the last. 


B27 


C: What is leaning cannot be straight. The explanation lies 
in the ladder. 

E: Leaning: Two wheels being high and two wheels being 
small and without spokes are [the features of] a mobile 
ladder. There is a weight at its front and a drawing cord at 
its front. You carry the drawing cord at its front, you carry 
the drawing cord on its wheel and suspend the weight at its 
front. In the case of this ladder, you lift. Moreover, when 
you lift, it then goes up. In general, with a weight, if it is not 
lifted up from above, or if it is not received from below, or 
if it does not have a lateral force applied, then it goes 
downwards vertically. If it is slanting or something ‘harms’ 
it, it is unstable. The ladder itself does not have instability- 
it is upright. In the present case, when the weight is placed 
on level ground, the weight is necessarily down and not to 
the side. The situation where the rope draws down on the 
wheel is like that where there is a horizontal [rope] drawing 
on a boat’s centre. Leaning against, resisting, firm, ladder; 
if it is leaning against something, it is not upright. 

Comment: The subject is a mobile ladder that can be raised by weights and 
ropes/pulleys, whether for military use or otherwise, but there is considerable 
variation in how this structure is envisaged. Another version of B27 creates a 
separate C&E about the ladder, for which the C is essentially lost, and with the last 
ten characters (the final sentence above) omitted from E. A further possibility 
makes the discussion of the ladder a part of B26. B27 has an inordinate number of 
rare, unknown or otherwise controversial characters which are quite variously 
emended or interpreted. 


B28 


C: In piling up there must be a support. The explanation lies 
in placing material (a stone base). 

E: Piling up: Placing stones together horizontally and 
adding stones vertically are the methods used for the side 
room and the central room. [In the present case place a 
stone on level ground.] A square (reference) stone is placed 
1 chi away from the ground, and a connecting stone is 
placed at its lower surface. A suspending cord is attached to 
its upper surface and is caused to reach to the square 
(reference) stone, so it doesn’t fall down, and there is a 
column. If the cord remains attached but the (supporting) 
stone is removed, this is lifting. If the cord is cut, this is 
‘drawing down’. If there is no change (in the cord), but the 
stone changes, this is ‘receiving’. 

Comment: To erect any structure (or a pillar specifically), there must be a base or 
foundation. The first sentence of E is beset by problems. 


B29 

C: Price does not equate with value. Tire explanation lies in 
the reciprocal nature of price (trading). 

E: Price: Money and grain are mutually related in terms of 
price. If money is low (in value), grain is not expensive, 
whereas if money is high (in value), grain is not cheap. Tire 
royal coinage does not change but grain does change, and if 



the year changes [the amount of] grain, then the year 
changes money. It is like selling sons. 

Comment: Goods have no intrinsic value, so price is determined by the reciprocity 
of buying and selling. The most straightforward reading of E is as an exemplification 
of the reciprocal relationship in terms of money and grain. The particular point of 
the last two sentences is that even if money minted under royal regulations is 
intended to have a fixed value, it still cannot take into account the vagaries of grain 
production: both sides of the equation are ultimately subject to variation due to 
factors beyond human control. 


B30 

C: If the price is appropriate, then sell. The explanation lies 
in ‘completeness’. 

E: Price: ‘Completeness’ is to completely do away with 
whatever makes it not sell. If what makes it not sell is done 
away with, then it sells, ‘correcting’ the price. Whether it is 
appropriate or not appropriate ‘corrects’whether (the item) 
is desired or not desired. It is like a defeated country where 
houses are sold and offspring given in marriage. 

B31 

C: If there is no explanation, there is fear. Tire explanation 
lies in not being certain. 

E: Not: If one’s son is in the army, one is not certain 
whether he is dead or alive. If one hears of a battle, one is 



also not certain whether he is dead or alive. In the former 
case, there is no fear; in the latter case, there is fear. 

Comment: In C the final character xin (heart) is emended to bi (necessary, certain). 
In E qian (before, i.e. ‘the former’) and jin (now, i.e. ‘the latter’) are most 
commonly taken to refer respectively to the two situations of simply being in the 
army, and of being in the army and engaged in a battle. 


B32 

C: Huo (something, someone) is a ‘passing’ name. The 
explanation lies in the entity. 

E: Huo (something, someone): One knows ‘this’ is not 
‘this’ and also knows ‘this’ is not at ‘this’. Nevertheless, 
one calls ‘this’ south or north, having passed through and 
taken it already to be so. At first one called ‘this’ the south, 
so now one calls ‘this’the south. 

Comment: Whether the head character is taken as huo (something, someone) or as 
yu (region, boundary), B32 is about naming. In relationship to Gongsun Long’s ‘On 
Names and Entities’ and to Hui Shi’s Paradox 6 (First List) (The south has no limit 
and yet has a limit), the two situations are defined: the name applies to a specific 
entity and is fixed (e.g. horse, ox), whereas in the second, the name is variously 
applied or is relative, the examples being the demonstrative pronoun ci (this), and 
the directions north, south, east and west. 


B33 

C: With respect to knowing, it is perverse [to take] knowing 
something and not knowing something to be sufficient for 
use. Tire explanation lies in there not being the means. 


E: When there is knowledge, one can discuss it; when there 
is not knowledge, there is no means (to do so). 

Comment: There are at least four modified versions of this C aimed at making the 
statement more intelligible. This translation emends zhun (to impress upon, 
reiterate) to bei (obstinate, perverse). Most commentators see B33 as a response to 
Confucius’ views expressed in Analects 11.17, and amplified in Xunzi 29.6. 


B34 

C: Calling is disputing without overcoming; there is 
certainly no validity [involved]. Tlie explanation lies in 
disputing. 

E: Calling: If what is called [something] is not the same, 
then it is different. Hie case of being the same is one 
person saying, ‘Hiis is a dog’ and another saying, ‘Hiis is a 
pup.’ Hie case of being different is one person saying, ‘Hiis 
is an ox’ and another saying, ‘Hiis is a horse.’ hi both there 
is not overcoming. When in both there is not overcoming, 
it is not disputation. Disputation is where one person says, 
‘Hiis is this’ and another says, ‘Hiis is not [this]’, and the 
one who is correct, overcomes. 

Comment: The principal issue is whether it is primarily about wei (to call, say) or 
bian (to dispute, discuss). Chmielewski translates C: ‘It is said: if there is no 
victory in discrimination, (the discrimination itself) must be invalid’, but this 
ignores the role of wei (to call, say) as the head character in E. The point appears to 
be to make a contrast between wei (to call) and bian (to dispute): if two people say 
something about an entity, whether it be the same or different, if there is no 
establishment of validity of one position (i.e. overcoming), it is not disputation. 


B34, regardless of the precise interpretation, is directed at Zhuangzi 2 - or vice 
versa. 


B35 

C: Not not (always) yielding is not permissible. Hie 
explanation lies in proximity. 

E: Not: In respect to yielding, there is that in relation to 
wine; where there is proximity, it is not permissible to 
yield. [It is like being near to the city gate or to Zang (the 
person).] 


B36 

C: In one [thing] there is the known in it and there is the not 
known in it. The explanation lies in existing. 

E: In: Astone is one [thing]; hard and white are two [things] 
and are in the stone. Tlierefore ‘there is the known in it and 
there is the not known in it’ is permissible. 

Comment: B36 and B37 must be seen in relation to Gonggun Long’s argument 
about the hard white stone (‘On Hard and White’). The second sentence of E, apart 
from the final ke (can, permissible), is identical, possibly even a direct quote, from 
that essay. 


B37 

C: There is zhi (representation, pointing out) through two 
and they cannot be separated. Tire explanation lies in taking 


the two and the three. 

E: There is zhi: If you know this and also know this which I 
previously raised, this is double. Then, if you know this, but 
do not know that which I previously raised, this is one. This 
is to say there is the known in it and there is the not known 
in it is admissible. If you know it, then it is valid to zhi it 
(represent it, point it out). If knowledge informs me, then I 
know it. A combi ned zhi is through two. Acrosswise zhi is 
when three are met with. It is like saying what I raise is 
necessarily individually zhi (represented, pointed out) and 
what I do not raise is not zhi (represented, pointed out), so 
the zhi is certainly not able to be individually zhi 
(represented, pointed out), and what you wish to zhi 
(represent, point out) is not put forward, so the concept is 
still not clear. Moreover, if what is known is this and what 
is not known is this, then this is known and this is not 
known, so how can you make it one and say: ‘There is the 
known in it, there is the not known in it.’ 

Comment: Difficulties in C particularly relate to er (two) and can (three), and to a 
lesser extent to zhi (represent, point out). There is also the question of the extent to 
which E is a single statement amplifyingC, or a presentation of opposing views. 
Further, there is the issue of how B37 is linked to Gongsun Long’s ‘On Hard and 
White’: the argument here is that the qualities ‘hard’ and ‘white’ cannot be separated 
from each other or from the stone, but all are ‘represented’, i.e. capable of being 
pointed out independently or individually identified as qualities or entities that can 
be perceived separately, but are inextricably linked in the stone. 


B38 


C: There is that which you know but are unable to zhi 
(represent, point out). The explanation lies in spring, a 
runaway servant, pup/dog, what is lost. 

E: That which: In the case of spring, its state cannot be 
represented (pointed out). In the case of a runaway servant, 
there is not knowing his whereabouts. In the case of 
pup/dog, there is not knowing its name. In the case of what 
is lost, despite skill, one is not able to regain (duplicate) it. 

Comment: B38 clearly continues the discussion of zhi (to represent, point out) and 
its relationship to zhi (to know). Assuming, as earlier, a usage of the former similar 
to that in Gongsun Long’s Zhiwu Lun (‘On Pointing Out Things’), the point would 
seem to be that contrary to the comprehensive nature of zhi proposed by Gongsun 
Long, the Later Mohists wish to claim that some ‘things’ cannot be 
represented/pointed out, or are not representations/pointings out. 


B39 

C: To know a pup (gou) yet to say of yourself that you do 
not know a dog (quart) is a mistake. The explanation lies in 
duplication. 

E: Knowing: If to know a pup (gou) duplicates to know a 
dog (quart), then it is a mistake. If it does not duplicate 
this, then it is not a mistake. 

Comment: However gou and quart are rendered into English (dogLound, 
whelp/dog, pup/dog, dog/dog), the point is that both are names for the one entity, 
i.e. er mingyi shi (two names, one entity), or a ‘dupheated name’, so to claim to 
know one and not the other is a mistake. For E, the point appears to be that if 


‘knowing a pup ’ does duplicate ‘knowing a dog’, then to make the claim instanced 
in C is, indeed, a mistake; if there is no such duplication, then it is not a mistake. 


B40 

C: Understand the idea (meaning) before replying. The 
explanation lies in not knowing what it is he is speaking of. 
E: Understanding: The questioner asks: ‘Do you know the 
sojourner?’ The one replying says: ‘What is the sojourner 
called?’ The other says: ‘Tire sojourner is Shi.’ Then you 
know him. If you don’t ask what the sojourner is called but 
directly respond with ‘I don’t know’, then it is a mistake. 
Moreover, the response must be appropriate to the question 
in terms of time. For example, the response may be long; 
the response may be profound or superficial. 

Comment: Zhang Huiy an’s paraphrase of C makes the meaning very clear. It is: 
‘First understand the other’s meaning and after that, reply to him; otherwise you 
don’t know what he is referring to’ (Zhang Huiy an, Mozi Jingshuo Jie, MZJC 9). 
The issues in E are an unknown character which occurs twice, and the final seven 
characters which some include as the end of this E and some as the initial part of 
B41’s E. Most commentators do include them in the present E but variably 
punctuated and usually with tian (heaven) emended to da (large). Graham retains 
tian and offers: ‘AmongHeaven’s constants its presence is prolonged with man’ 
which is difficult not only to understand in itself but also to relate to the subject 
matter of C. I have omitted the seven characters, but see the Comment to B41. 


B41 


C: Where someone is, and who it is that is there; where (in 
what) they are, and who they are. The four are different. The 
explanation [lies in what is primary], 

E: Place: Hie room or hall is the place where they are. His 
sons are those who are there. To rely on who is there and 
ask about the room or hall, one says: ‘Where (in what) are 
they?’ To take as primary the room or hall and ask about 
who is there, one says: ‘Who is there?’ In one case, this is 
to take as evident who is there as the basis for asking where 
they are; in the other case, it is to take as evident where 
they as the basis for asking who is there. 

Comment: Graham describes C as ‘badly mutilated’. On the seven characters 
mentioned in the B40 comment, Wu Feibai (Zhongguo Gumingjia Yan) emends them 
so they might be translated: ‘If a person is in a hall, there is his person and where he 
is’, thus establishing the situation about which questions are framed. 


B42 

C: Among the Five Phases there is not one that constantly 
overcomes. The explanation lies in the appropriateness. 

E: Five: If you combine water, earth and fire, fire loses. 
Nevertheless, fire melts metal, fire being greater, and metal 
extinguishes charcoal, metal being greater. If you combine 
the ‘treasury’ wood [with itself, then] wood ‘loses’ wood. It 
is like distinguishing the numbers of deer and fish - it 
simply depends on circumstances. 


Comment: The same statement of the Five Phases theory (apart from one 
insignificant variation) appears in The Art of War (Sunzi ) 6, which Roger Ames 
translates: ‘Thus, of the five phases (wu xing), none is the constant victor’ (Sun- 
Tzu: The Art of Warfare, New York: Ballantine Books, 1993). Fung Yi-lan writes: 

‘In Tsou Tzu’s cycle of the Five Powers, each one follows that which it cannot 
overcome ... ’ ( History of Chinese Philosophy, trans. D. Bodde (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1952), vol. 1). Graham, however, thinks B42 expresses 
opposition to the theory. 


B43 

C: It is not the case that desiring and detesting are 
respectively beneficial and harmful. The explanation lies in 
being appropriate. 

E: Not: Desiring and detesting injure life and harm 
longevity. This is explained by reducing what is offered and 
liking this only. When there is a lot of grain, there may be 
the wish not to have it because it can also be injurious - 
like the effect of wine on people. Moreover, when a wise 
person benefits others, it is love. Then wisdom alone is not 
controlling. 

Comment: The main problem in E is whether the shao lian refers to the moderate 
person of that name, spoken of in the Book of Rites {Li Ji ) and Analects XVIII.8 or 
not. Graham argues strongly against the former position; his view is followed here. 
In this translation, B43 is an argument for moderation and it takes a position 
between Song Xing and Xun Qing (Xun Zi). 


B44 


C: There are instances where loss is not harmful. The 
explanation lies in there being excess. 

E: Loss: In the case of eating one’s fill, to set aside what is 
superfluous having eaten enough is not harmful. Eating to 
satiety can be harmful. It is like the injured deer being 
without a haunch. Moreover, there are instances of loss 
before there is gain. It is like the fever in a febrile illness. 

Comment: The meaning is that there can be loss without there being harm if the 
loss involves what is superfluous. Wu Feibai states that B44 opposes the view sun 
you hai (with loss there is harm) and links both B44 and B43 to the argument in 
favour of moderation (jieyong) which he relates to Song Xing. It also refers to 
Zhuangzi 8 and the matter of excess flesh as exemplified by webbed toes and 
supernumerary digits. E amplifies the argument with three examples: the case of 
eating - to stop eating when enough has been eaten and not go on to excess avoids 
any harm, and eating to excess is harmful, although quite how the example illustrates 
this remains obscure; the second, about the deer, is also obscure; and what is at first 
damaging can later be beneficial, as in the case of a fever which may bring resolution 
of an illness. 


B45 

C: There is knowing which is not by way of the ‘five roads’ 
(five senses). The explanation lies in duration. 

E: Knowledge (knowing): Seeing is by means of the eyes 
and the eyes see by means of fire, and yet fire does not see. 
If knowledge was only by way of the ‘five roads’ (five 
senses), it would not relate to duration. Seeing is by means 
of the eyes is like seeing is by means of fire. 


Comment: If wu lu (five roads) refers to the five senses (wu guan ), the meaning is 
relatively clear, although there is some variation in the reading of jiu (duration). The 
point appears to be that there is knowledge by means of the five senses (empirical 
knowledge) which is instantaneous, but enduring knowledge involves some process 
other than the immediate sensation. 


B46 

C: Fire is necessarily hot. Hie explanation lies in seeing. 

E: Fire: Calling the fire hot is not to take the fire’s heat as 
something I have. It is like looking at the sun. 

Comment: There is widespread agreement that dun (here ‘seeing’ - the final 
character in C) needs to be emended but not on the substitute. For E, wo (I) may be 
emended to fei (a negative), and the emendation of yue (to say) to ri (the sun) is 
generally accepted. Wu Feibai’s reading brings B46 into close relation with the 
C&Es before and after it and to the issue addressed in Gong^un Long’s ‘On Hard 
and White’ about the separate perception of qualities. 


B47 

C: Knowing what he knows and does not know. The 
explanation lies in the use of naming and choosing. 

E: Knowing: If you lump together what he knows and what 
he doesn’t know and question him, then he has to say: ‘This 
is what I know, this is what I don’t know.’ Choosing and 
discarding both make this possible; these are the two kinds 
of knowing. 

Comment: The different versions of the first sentences in both C and E may be 
most straight forwardly interpreted as being about the method of asking to determine 


what another person knows and does not know; this can be gauged by his ability to 
‘name’ and to ‘choose’. See also Mozi 47.9. 


B48 

C: Not being does not necessarily depend on being. The 
explanation lies in what is said. 

E: Not being: For example, with something not being there, 
there was this and afterwards there is not. In the case of 
there not being ‘heaven falling’, this was not so (before) 
and is not so (now). 

Comment: C contrasts the pair ‘being’ and ‘not being’, which differs from B47’s 
pair, ‘knowing’ and ‘not knowing’. In B48 they are not interdependent, while in 
B47, they are a counter to the Daoist position of regarding them as mutually 
dependent (e.g. Laozi 2, Zhuangzi 2). ‘Heaven falling’ is a Daoist example. 


B49 

C: In quoting a precedent, in general there is not doubt. Hie 
explanation lies in what is and what is not. 

E: Quoting a precedent: If there is doubt it is not said. ‘If 
Zang has recently died and the same thing also affects 
Chun, he will also die’ is permissible. 

Comment: There are major problems with B49; emendations make the subject the 
reliability of drawing an inference from an established fact. 


B50 


C: What is about to be so cannot be stopped, yet there is no 
harm in putting forth effort. The explanation lies in what is 
appropriate. 

E: About to be so: It is like this. What is about to be so is 
necessarily so. What is about to come to an end necessarily 
comes to an end. With regard to being about to put forth 
effort for something to come to an end, it is necessary to 
put forth the effort and afterwards it comes to an end. 

Comment: Wu Yijiang (Mozi Jiaozhu, vol. 2) suggests that B50 exemplifies the 
Mohists’ ‘spirit of constantly striving to be better’, but it must be seen in relation 
to the anti-fatalist position taken in the main body of the Mozi. Graham describes 
B50 as being ‘remarkable in touching the issue of fatalism at a much deeper level 
than elsewhere in the Mozi’. 


B51 

C: Being balanced [determines] whether something breaks 
or not. The explanation lies in what is balanced. 

E: Balanced: If a hair is balanced it suspends light [or heavy 
things] but if the hair breaks, it is not balanced. Balanced is 
when what might break does not break. 

B52 

C: In the case of Yao’syz (right conduct, righteousness and 
justice), it is heard of in the present but is located in the 


past, and these are different times. The explanation lies in 
what is yi being two. 

E: Yao and crane: The one is shown to people through the 
name; the other is shown to people through the object. 
When you raise Yao’s perfection, this is to use the name to 
show people. When you point to this crane, this is to use 
the object to showpeople. In the case of Yao’s yi, the 
hearing of it may be in the present, but what is yi is located 
in the past. (For example, there is danger at the city gates 
and in the storehouse.) 

Comment: There is disagreement as to how yi should be understood: I have 
followed the usual rendering of ‘right action/conduct’ or ‘righteousness’, as opposed 
to ‘goodness’, ‘example’ or ‘model’. If Yao’s yi is being raised or Yao (the ancient 
sage king) is being used as an example, he is indicated by name; the name is raised in 
the present but the entity (reality) - i.e. Yao and his yi - existed in the past. E is 
more of a problem. In brief, there are two examples - Yao’s yi (right conduct, 
righteousness and justice) and crane - one of which can only be indicated by name 
whereas in the other case, there can be a direct pointing to the entity. (The final 
sentence remains a problem.) 


B53 

C: Apup is a dog, yet ‘to kill a pup is not to kill a dog’ is 
admissible. The explanation lies in the duplication. 

E: Apup: Apup is a dog. So to call killing a pup killing a 
dog is admissible. It is like the two buttocks. 

Comment: The key issue is whether bu (not) is added to C (making bu ke- not 
admissible), apparently bringing C and E into agreement. B53 is the Later Mohist 


response to Paradox 17 of the Second List in Zhuangzi 33 (i.e. a pup is not a dog); it 
must also be seen in the light of Mozi 45.6 (‘killing a robber is not killing a person’) 
and an example of er mingyi shi (two names, one entity). This is an issue of some 
importance to the Later Mohists. The addition of bu makes C and E both 
straightforward refutations of the Paradox, but it seems more probable that in C, the 
Later Mohist is acknowledging the possibility of making the distinction, just as in 
the case of ‘robber’ and ‘man’, although, in fact, killing a pup is killing a dog, as E 
explains. 


B54 

C: In causing a servant [to act] there is yi (right action, 
righteousness and justice). The explanation lies in causing. 
E: Causing: Ordering is causing: Righteously to cause is yi\ 
righteously not to cause is also yi. There is causing to 
employ: Yi also applies to causing to employ; not yi also 
applies to causing to employ. 

Comment: All Chinese commentators find B54 to be incomprehensible and 
propose various major changes. Graham retains C, although he emends yin 
(flourishing, abundant, a dynasty) to dian (hall, palace) (see below): ‘Shi dian mei 
“cause a hall to be beautiful” is so unidiomatic that no commentator known to me 
has ever taken the sentence in this sense, but a consideration of the Mohist’s special 
style shows it to be acceptable.’ Three approaches to E are: this translation; 

Graham uses the DZ text with relatively minor changes: ‘To command is to intend 
an effect. Whether I obey or not, you intend the effect on me; whether the hall 
becomes beautiful or not, you intend the effect on it’; or simply labelling both C and 
E as not clear. 


B55 


C: Pespite] Jing’s (Chu’s) greatness, its [dependency] 
Shen is weak. The explanation lies in its being a tool. 

E: Jing (Chu): Shen is Jing’s (Chu’s) tool. Then Shen’s 
weakness is not Jing’s (Chu’s) weakness. It is like changing 
one part of five. 

Comment: This translation depends on how jing (the state of Chu or bramble), 
shen (a dependency of Chu, submerged or hang (the name of a marsh in Chu)), and 
jian/qian (as shallow or weak) are understood. Graham reads jing as ‘bramble’ 
making B55 about submerging brambles. He also transfers the final sentence of E to 
B56’s E. 


B56 

C: To take the pillar to be round is taking it to be what is 
not known. The explanation lies in conceptualizing 
(conjecturing). 

E: To take: In the case of the pillar’s roundness, when we 
see it, its being in the concept doesn’t change from prior 
knowledge. Aconcept is an image. For example, the pillar 
being lighter than catalpa [wood] - if it is as a concept, it is 
foolish. 

Comment: The analogy remains a problem, as does the issue of the five characters 
(the final sentence) at the end of B55’s E. The example of the pillar in relation to yi 
(concept, idea) is also raised in Mozi 44.11. Several modem commentators interpret 
yi in the sense of yidu (conjecture). 


B57 


C: Hie concept of a hammer cannot be known beforehand. 
The explanation lies in its being possible to use and goes 
beyond matching. 

E: Ahammer: Hiat hammering block and hammer both 
serve in [the making of] shoes is ‘being possible to use’. 
Completing the decorating of shoes goes beyond the 
hammer and the hammer goes beyond the decorating of 
shoes - they are the same in this respect. This is going 
beyond matching. 


B58 

C: One is less than two and yet more than five. The 
explanation lies in establishing the position. 

E: One: Five has one in it; one has five in it; ten is (means) 
two. 

Comment: Most commentators see the observations as about 1 and 10, i.e. about 
the two cases of 1 being one unit and 10 being one unit, and relate B58 to the 
abacus, which offers a satisfactory interpretation of jian zhu (with zhu emended to 
wei) - i.e. establishing the position). Graham points out that this presents problems 
with the syntax of E, particularly if shi (ten) is retained. Perhaps the simplest and 
most appropriate interpretation is that this is about hands and fingers. Thus, 1 
finger is less than 2 fingers, yet 1 hand is more than 5 fingers, i.e. it depends on 
whether finger or hand is given ‘position’; then, in E, 5 fingers are on 1 hand, 1 hand 
has 5 fingers on it, and there are 10 fingers on 2 hands. 


B59 


C: If what is not divisible in half is not divided, then there 
is not progression. The explanation lies in the point. 

E: Not: hr dividing in half, you progress by taking what is in 
front. Tire front, then, is the centre of what was not halved; 
it is like a point. If you take both what is in front and what is 
behind, then a point is the centre. In dividing, there must be 
a half for, if there is not and there is not a half, it is not 
possible to divide. 

Comment: The two textual issues are how to read an unknown character which 
occurs fourth in C and in E (twice), and, of lesser significance, whether duan (a 
point) should be retained or emended. It is agreed that B59 is intended as a 
refutation of Paradox21 of the Second List: ‘If a rod 1 chi long is cut short by half 
its length every day, there will still be something left even after ten thousand 
generations’ (Guo Qingfan, Zhuangzi Jishi, chapter 33, vol. 4, p. 1106); for an 
English translation of the paradoxes, see Burton Watson, Chuang Tzu, pp. 374-6). 

E considers two methods of division: taking what is in front, leaving finally what 
was the extreme right point of the line; and taking from both in front and behind, 
leaving finally what was the original central point of the line. Either way, the end 
result is a single point. 


B60 

C: Not being (non-being) is admissible, but once there is 
being, it cannot be set aside. Tire explanation lies in once 
being so. 

E: Admissible: Not being (non-being) is admissible: Once 
something has already been, then it must have been so and 
[its] not being (non-being) is inadmissible. 


Comment: There is general agreement on meaning and perceived intent, accepting 
wu/you as non-being/being. (The problematic final five characters are included in 
B63’s E.) 


B61 

C: Regular (central) and not able to vary. Hie explanation 
lies in being spherical. 

E: Regular: With a ball there is nowhere it can be placed 
where it does not hang from its centre because it is 
spherical. 

Comment: Other interpretations of the subject are spherical objects tending to 
continuous movement by rotation or astronomical matters. 


B62 

C: Going forward in space there is no near. Hie explanation 
lies in spreading out. 

E: Space: When a region cannot be partially raised 
(demarcated), there is space. What moves forward first 
spreads out near and afterwards spreads out far. 

Comment: The three textual changes in E, on which there is broad agreement, are 
the reversal of the order of yu (hunchbacked) and yu (space, the universe) to make 
the latter the head character, the reading of yu (hunchbacked) as qu (zone, locality - 
here ‘region’) and the emendation of zi (character, name) to give the second yu 
(space, the universe). Compare the definition of ‘space’ (yu ) in A41. Some 
commentators see a relationship to Hui Shi’s Paradox 9: ‘I know the world’s centre. 
It is north of (the state of) Yan and south of (the state of) ’Vue.’ Sima Biao’s note on 
this is: ‘The distance of Yan from Yie is established, yet the distance between north 


and south is without limit. To consider what is established from the point of view 
of what is without limit, then between Yan and Yue there is not, at first, a 
differentiation. Heaven is without direction, therefore where one is may be deemed 
the centre; a circle (a revolution) is without a point of origin, therefore where one is 
may be deemed the origin.’ 


B63 

C: Travelling a distance uses (involves) duration. The 
explanation lies in before and after. 

E: Travelling: The one travelling is necessarily near before 
and far after. Far and near are distances. Before and after 
are durations. If people travel distances, it must involve 
duration. (Duration is both limited and without limit.) 

Comment: This refutes Hui Shi’s Paradox 7 (First List): ‘Today I go to Yie yet I 
arrive yesterday.’ 


B64 

C: When things belong together under one criterion this 
completes a class - for example, the collecting together of 
squares. Tire explanation lies in ‘squareness’. 

E: One: When squares complete a class they all have the 
criterion, although they may be different. If some are wood 
and some are stone, this doesn’t harm their being grouped 
together as squares. Uiey complete a class such as 
‘squares’. Things are all like this. 



Comment: The essential meaning is that a particular criterion is the basis of class 
membership, and provided this criterion is met, then despite other differences, the 
things possessing the criterion may be joined in a class. 


B65 

C: ‘Wild raisings’ are inadmissible as a means of knowing 
differences. The explanation lies in ‘having’ (or - in their 
being inadmissible). 

E: ‘Wild’: Ox and horse are certainly different but to take 
‘ox has incisors’, ‘horse has tail’ as an explanation of ‘ox is 
not horse’ is inadmissible. These are what both have and not 
what one has and one doesn’t have. If you say, ‘ox and horse 
are not of a class’ on the basis of ox having horns and horse 
not having horns, this is the class not being the same. But if 
you do [not] raise, ‘ox has horns, horse does not have 
horns’ as the basis for the classes not being the same, this 
is wild raising. It is like ‘ox has incisors, horse has tail’. 
(Sometimes ‘not not-ox and not-ox’ is admissible. Then 
sometimes ‘not-ox and ox’ is admissible.) 

Comment: The first issue with C is how best to understand, and therefore 
translate, the head characters ( kuangju ): I accept that they act as a technical term, 
and are the converse of zheng ju (correct raising or picking out). Ju is defined in 
A31. Li Shenglong’s modem equivalent of huluan juchu (careless citing) seems 
appropriate (Xinyi Mozi Duben (Taipei, 1996)); Graham renders it ‘referring 
arbitrarily’. The second issue is the division of B65’s C from B66’s C; I have 
included a translation of the other version in round brackets (incorporating the 
translation of bu ke (inadmissible)). There is also the question about where to divide 


E: I have included the sentences in round brackets which are often made part of 
B66. ‘Wild raising’ is a basis for a distinction of classes using something that both 
entities under consideration (i.e. ox and horse) have, even though, in the case of 
incisors and tails, there may be some specific differences in their forms. ‘Correct 
raising’ is, then, to take the presence and absence of horns as the basis for class 
distinction. 


B66 

C: The grounds for taking ‘ox-horse is not ox’ being 
inadmissible and being admissible are the same. Tire 
explanation lies in the joining (combination). 

E: Not: If it is admissible that some are not ox is not ox, 
then some are not ox and some are ox is [also] admissible. 
Therefore, it is never admissible to say that ‘ox-horse is 
not ox’ and it is never admissible to say that ‘ox-horse is 
ox’, since it is admissible of some but inadmissible of 
others. And to say ‘ox-horse is ox’ is never admissible is 
also inadmissible. Furthermore, if ox is not two and horse 
is not two, but ox-horse is two, then ‘ox is not not-ox’, 
‘horse is not not-horse’ and ‘ox-horse is not ox and not 
horse’ are without difficulty. 

Comment: There are problems with the division of B66 and B65. Graham includes 
bu ke (inadmissible) at the start of C here and the sentences in round brackets at the 
end of B65’s E as the start of E here. He points out that B65 is about ‘having’ (you ) 
horns and tails and not about ‘something admissible’, and further, that the C 
requires bu ke (inadmissible) to balance kezhi (admissible). This can be countered 
by noting that B66 is specifically about a combined name, in relation, e.g, to Xunzi 
22 and the Gongsun Longzi (‘On White Horse’). 


B67 


C: That this, that this and that this are the same. The 
explanation lies in the differences. 

E: That: In the correction of names, with respect to that and 
this [there are three cases]. 

(i) That and this are admissible: That [name] applies to that [entity] and stops 
at that [entity]; this [name] applies to this [entity] and stops at this 
[entity]. 

(ii) That and this are not admissible: That [name] but this [entity]. 

(iii) That-this is also admissible: That-this stops at that-this. In this case, with 
respect to that and this, there is also that as well as this, and also this as 
well as that. 

Comment: For C, most commentators are dissatisfied with, or puzzled by, xun 
(the first and third character in C which usually means to follow or accord with), 
although it should be noted that some argue for retaining it in the sense of shun 
(agree or comply with). There is also the apparently paradoxical conjunction of tong 
(the same) and >7 (different), which seems to be clarified by the three combinations 
of bi (that) and ci (this) in which the two characters are the same, but their ‘validity’ 
differs; this bring? B67 essentially into agreement with Gong?un Long’s ‘On Names 
and Entities’ (Gongsun Longzi 1), the conflict being with the view expressed in 
Zhuangzi 2. 


B68 

C: Leading and following are linked together. Hie 
explanation lies in the merit. 

E: Leading: In leading without exception, there is not what 
is comprehensive - like weeds, hi following without 


exception, there is being directed - there is no choice. 
Leading but not following - this is not to learn. If you do 
not learn when your knowledge is slight, your merit must 
be diminished. Following but not leading - this is not to 
teach. If you do not teach when your knowledge is great, 
your merit comes to an end. For example, if you cause a 
person to seize another’s garment, the fault in one (the 
perpetrator) is slight and in the other (the instigator) is 
great. If you cause a person to give wine to another, the 
merit in one (the instigator) is great and in the other (the 
perpetrator) is slight. 

Comment: Although B68 seems to be about the interrelationship between leading 
and following and their relative merits, there are several unresolved issues, 
particularly how to understand the presumed correspondence between chang/he 
(leading/following) and jiao/xue (teaching/learning). 


B69 

C: If you hear that what you don’t know is like what you do 
know, then you know both (the two). The explanation lies in 
informing. 

E: Hearing: What is outside is what you know. What is in 
the room is what you don’t know. Someone says: ‘The 
colour of what is in the room is like the colour of this.’ 

This is to hear that what you don’t know is like what you do 
know. One says that white is like white and black is like 


black. It is like this being its colour; it is like white 
necessarily being white. Now you know its colour is like 
white, therefore you know it is white. Names are the means 
whereby what is not known is made clear and corrected and 
not the means whereby doubt is cast on what is clear. It is 
like using chi as a measurement for an unknown length. 
What is outside you know by direct experience; what is in 
the room you know by being told. 

Comment: C says one learns of what one does not know by hearing it linked to 
what one does know. E concludes there are two ways of knowing: by direct 
experience and by being informed, the latter possibly requiring the use of something 
already known. 


B70 

C: To take words to be completely false is false. The 
explanation lies in the person’s words. 

E: To take: False equates with inadmissible. If this person’s 
words are admissible and this is not false, then this is also 
admissible. If this person’s words are inadmissible in terms 
of validity, they are certainly not valid. 

Comment: If shen (to investigate, examine, discriminate) were retained in the final 
sentence of E, this would read: ‘If this person’s words are inadmissible, to take 
them as valid is certainly not to be prudent.’ On bei (false), Graham writes: ‘Pei 
(bei) “confused”, “fallacious” in later Mohist usage seems always to imply self- 
contradiction. The reference is presumably to Chuang-tzu’s thesis that of anything 
said we may equally well say the opposite.’ 



B71 


C: If the response to what I say (call it) is not the name, 
then it is inadmissible. The explanation lies in the converse. 
E: Responding: To say this huo (crane, a person’s name) is 
admissible, but it is still not huo in general. To say ‘that’ 
and ‘this’ are ‘this’ is inadmissible. What is spoken of does 
not correspond to what he says. If ‘that’ corresponds to 
what he says, then what I say works. If ‘that’ does not 
correspond to what he says, then what the other says does 
not work. 

Comment: There is an issue with the head character wei. Following Sun Yirang I 
have taken it as meaning to respond or answer promptly. Also, should huo be 
understood as he (crane - ‘the stock example of a name which can be loaned for 
another thing’, according to Graham) or as the name of a person; I have left this 
open. Also I have not deleted bu (a negative) from the penultimate sentence. B71 
may be about the distinction between wei (to say, refer) and ming (to name), but 
what is likely is that the subject matter is related to the Gongsun Longzi (‘On 
Names and Entities’), although exactly how is problematic. 


B72 

C: ‘Without limit’ does not preclude (harm) ‘universal’. 
The explanation lies in being filled or not. 

E: Not: Objection: In the case of the south, if it has a 
limit, then it can be ‘exhausted’; if it has no limit, then it 
cannot be ‘exhausted’. If it can never be known whether it 
does or does not have a limit, then whether it can or cannot 


be ‘exhausted’ can never be known. And whether people 
‘fill’ it or not can never be known, so whether people can or 
cannot be ‘exhausted’ can also never be known. So, of 
necessity, the claim that people can love exhaustively (i.e. 
universally) is perverse. 

Response: With respect to people, if they do not ‘fill’ what 
is ‘without limit’, then people are ‘with limit’. ‘Exhausting’ 
what is ‘with limit’ presents no difficulty. If (people) ‘fill’ 
what is ‘without limit’, then what is ‘without limit’ is 
‘exhausted’. ‘Exhausting’what is ‘without limit’presents no 
difficulty. 

Comment: This is a defence of the central Mohist doctrine of ‘universal love’ with 
E taking the form of an objection to the postulate of C, followed by a response. The 
Objector uses Hui Shi’s Paradox 6 (First List) - ‘The south is without limit and yet 
has a limit’ - as the starting point of his argument: that there cannot be ‘universal 
love’ for what is ‘without limit’. The Responder establishes that whether people are 
‘with limit’ or ‘without limit’, it is nevertheless possible to love them all. See also 
B73 and B74. 


B73 

C: Not to know their number but to know their 
‘exhausting’. The explanation lies in questioning. 

E: Not: Objection: If you don’t know their number, how do 
you know that loving the people is something that 
‘exhausts’ it? 


Response: There are some who are left out in his 
questioning. If he exhaustively questions people, then he 
exhaustively loves those who are questioned. Then not to 
know the number, yet to know loving them ‘exhausts’ it, is 
without difficulty. 

Comment: Continues the debate about universal love, using the analogy between 
questioning and loving, if the emendation of ming (clear) to wen (ask, question) is 
accepted. The objection-response structure is used here (see B72), although not all 
commentators make it clear. The objection is that if you don’t know how many 
people there are, how can you claim to love them all? The response is that it is just 
like asking or questioning: one can claim to have asked/questioned everyone without 
knowing the number. It is in the response that the retention of ming (clear) seems to 
present some difficulty. 


B74 

C: Not knowing their whereabouts does not preclude 
(harm) loving them. Hie explanation lies in lost sons. 

E: None 

Comment: Also in defence of the Mohist doctrine of jian ai (universal love): see 
B72. It doesn’t matter if there is no limit to the number of people, or the number is 
not known, or their location is not known - one can still love them all. 


B75 

C: To take ren (love, kindness, humaneness and 
benevolence) as being internal and yi (right action, 
righteousness and justice) as being external is wrong. The 
explanation lies in matching in the face. 


E: Ren : Ren equates with love; yi equates with benefit. 

Love and benefit relate to ‘this’ (the self); what is loved and 
what is benefited relate to ‘that’ (the other). Love and 
benefit are neither internal nor external; what is loved and 
what is benefited are neither external nor internal. To say 
that ren is internal and yi is external and to conflate love 
with what is benefited are examples of ‘wild raising’. It is 
like the left eye being external and the right eye being 
internal. 

Comment: There is general agreement that the target is the Mencius, with three 
issues in C: the order of wai (external) and nei (internal); how to read the second nei 
(internal); and how to interpret the final two characters (wuyan). On the first, I 
have reversed the order of wai and nei to follow the structure put forward by Gaozi 
in his exchange with Mencius (particularly VIB.4 and 5); for the original order, the 
point is more general: ‘external’ and ‘internal’ don’t apply to ren and yi at all. I have 
read the second nei as bei (perverse, wrong). On the third, I have retained wuyan, 
which makes sense in relation to the final sentence of E. 


B76 

C: Learning is of no benefit. The explanation lies in the one 
criticizing. 

E: In the case of learning, consider taking someone as not 
knowing that learning is without benefit and therefore 
teaching him [this]. Causing him to know that learning is 
without benefit is, in fact, to teach him. To take learning to 
be of no benefit and yet to teach is contradictory. 


Comment: To advance the view that learning is of no benefit yet to attempt to 
teach someone this is contradictory. Clearly the Mohists oppose this; it is 
exemplified by Laozi 20 which begins: ‘Get rid of learning and there is no anxiety.’ 


B77 

C: Whether criticism is admissible or not does not depend 
on whether it is much or little. The explanation lies in being 
admissible to negate (deny). 

E: Criticism: In sorting out whether criticism is admissible 
or inadmissible, if you take the principle as susceptible to 
criticism, then even if the criticism is excessive, it is right. 
If its principle is not susceptible to criticism, even if the 
criticism is slight, it is wrong. Nowadays it is said that what 
is much criticized is not admissible. This is like using the 
long to discuss the short. 

Comment: The text of E depends on taking fei (the head character) as ‘criticism’ 
and emending the first fei (a negative) to fei (to criticize). Graham reads the second 
fei (to criticize, criticism) as ‘reject’ or ‘deny’ and emends the third to fei (a 
negative). A more thoroughgoing rearrangement of E is made by Wu Feibai, which 
creates symmetry in the construction and obviates the problems of punctuation: 
then E means that whether something is open to criticism or not depends on 
whether it is right in principle or not; a great amount of criticism does not invalidate 
something that is right in principle just as conversely a paucity of criticism does not 
confer validity on something that is wrong in principle; this is to counter the 
tendency to take the amount of criticism as the criterion of validity. What is being 
criticized is not made exp licit, although it is probably philosophical doctrines in 
general. 



B78 


C: Negating criticism is perverse. The explanation lies in 
not negating. 

E: Negating: If the criticism is negatable, my criticism of it 
is not negatable; it is criticism inadmissible to negate. 
Being inadmissible to negate, this is not negatable 
criticism. 

Comment: Allowing for some variation in the reading of fei (to criticize, criticism) 

- see B77 - the meaning of C is clear. The meaning of E is less clear: is it a simple 
statement about criticism (as here); is it more generally about the denial of denial; or 
is it aimed at what are seen as the obfuscations of the School of Forms and Names 
( Xingmingjia ), as spoken of in the Lii Shi Chunqiul 


B79 

C: Athing [may be] extreme or not extreme. The 
explanation lies in being like ‘this’. 

E: Athing: If it is extremely long (the longest) or 
extremely short (the shortest), there is nothing longer than 
‘this’, or nothing shorter than ‘this’. In the cases of ‘this’ 
being ‘this’ or not being ‘this’, there is nothing more 
extreme than ‘this’. 

Comment: This translation depends on changes in C, and reading s/zew (very) as 
guodu (excessive, extreme). 


B80 


C: Choosing the low in order to seek the high. The 
explanation lies in [mountain and] marsh. 

E: Choosing: High and low are judged by the standards of 
good and bad. It is not like mountain and marsh. If being 
situated low is better than being situated high, [then] low is 
what is called high. 

Comment: There are several interpretations related to what emendations are made. 
One takes it as a refutation, on grounds of common sense, of the paradoxical 
statements in the Zhuangzi 17 and 33 and the Xunzi 3 and 22, in part at least 
attributable to Hui Shi, and focusing particularly on Paradox 3 of the First List: 
‘Heaven and earth are low, mountain and marsh are level.’ The most critical 
emendation here is shan (good, goodness) to cha (to differ) in E. With no 
emendations, it can be read as a Daoist statement, or with only one change - qing 
(to ask) to wei (to say) - it has an ethical interpretation as illustrated by a quote 
from the Jiazi 9. 


B81 

C: Not this and this are the same. The explanation lies in 
‘not different’. 

E: Not: (In the case of) ‘this-this’, there is ‘this’ as well as 
‘this’ in it. Now in the case of ‘this’, there is ‘this’ in ‘this’ 
and ‘not this’ in ‘this’, therefore ‘this-not this’. In the case 
of ‘this-not this’, then there is ‘this’ and ‘not this’ in it. Now 
in the case of ‘this’, there is ‘not this’ in ‘this’ and ‘this’ in 
‘this’, therefore ‘this’ and ‘this-not this’ are both said. 


Comment: B80 is rather perplexing, depending on how C is structured and on how 
the recurring wen (literature, elegant, refined) in E is emended. There is some 


common ground on taking the structure as two arguments and refutations, and the 
possible relation to Zhuangzi 2 and to the Gongsun Longzi, particularly the ‘White 
Horse Discussion’. I have made several emendations, including wen to shi (this) in 
all instances, so E consists of an initial statement representing the School of Names 
( Mingjia ) position (i.e. first, a white horse is a horse, and secondly, white can be 
separate) - the common-sense position - followed in each case by the School of 
Forms and Names ( Xingmingjia) position, exemplified by Gongsun Long (i.e. first, a 
white horse is not a horse, and secondly, white is not separate). 



44 


The Greater Choosing 
(. Daqu ) 


44.1 Heaven’s love of man is more all-encompassing than 
the sage’s love of man; its benefiting man is more profound 
than the sage’s benefiting man. lire great man’s love of the 
small man is more all-encompassing than the small man’s 
love of the great man; his benefiting the small man is more 
profound than the small man’s benefiting the great man. 

Comment: Interpretation depends on the reading of bo: in its usual sense of ‘thin, 
poor, slight’, or in the sense of ‘extensive’, citing instances in the Mozi (e.g. 26.5) 
and in other texts (e.g Zhongyong 31.3). The subject is love and benefit (ai and li), 
probably with emphasis on the distinction between the Confucian position, where 
the two are somewhat mutually exclusive with li being used pejoratively, and the 
Mohist position, where love and benefit are inextricably linked. If bo is read as 
‘extensive’ or ‘all-embracing’, then there is an hierarchical arrangement of the 
conjunction of love and benefit (Heaven>sage>great man>small man), whereas if it 
is read as ‘slight’, the relationship is seen as antithetical and reciprocal 
(Heaven/sage, and great man/small man). 


44.2 To consider an elaborate funeral as a manifestation of 
love for one’s parents is to love one’s parents. To consider 
an elaborate funeral as being of benefit to one’s parents is 
not to benefit one’s parents. To consider music to be of 
benefit to one’s son and to desire it for one’s son is to love 
one’s son. To consider music to be of benefit to one’s son 
and so seek it for one’s son is not to benefit one’s son. 

Comment: If zang and yue/le are read as (elaborate) funerals and music, 
respectively, the point is that in the case of these two Mohist anathemas, such 
demonstrations of love ignore the necessary nexus between love and benefit in that 
while they may be manifestations of the former, they do not, in fact, bring the latter, 
and so fail to qualify as true examples of the former. On the other hand, if both are 
taken as names, which is possible, these sentences can be interpreted as examples of 
incorrect inference. 


44.3 With respect to the parts [of the body], there is the 
weighing up of unimportant and important. This is called 
‘weighing’. Weighing is not about being right or wrong. It is 
about the weighing up being correct (i.e. making the right 
choice). In terms of benefit, cutting off a finger to preserve 
the hand is to choose the greater [benefit], whereas in 
terms of harm, it is to choose the lesser [harm]. In terms of 
harm, choosing the lesser is not to choose harm, but to 
choose benefit. What is chosen is controlled by others. 
When you meet a robber, to cut off a finger in order to 
spare the (whole) body is a benefit. Meeting a robber is the 
harm. In terms of benefit to the world, cutting off a finger 



and cutting off a hand are alike; there is no choosing. In 
terms of benefit, dying and living are as one; there is no 
choosing. If killing one person would preserve the world, it 
is wrong to kill one person to benefit the world. If killing 
oneself would preserve the world, it is right to kill oneself 
to benefit the world. With respect to the conduct of affairs, 
there is a weighing up of light and heavy. This is called 
‘seeking’. Seeking is about right and wrong. In situations 
where the lesser harm is chosen, the seeking may be yi 
(right and just) or it may not be yi. 

Comment: I take the first sentence as referring to parts of the body. ‘What is 
chosen is controlled by others’ means others determine what must be done - i.e. the 
meeting with a robber is determined by another person (the robber). The key 
distinction is between ‘weighingup’, which pertains to one’s person, and ‘seeking’, 
which pertains to affairs. In the first, the considerations are essentially practical: it 
is a matter of ‘weighing up ’ what is best. M eeting a robber is, at least to some 
extent, beyond one’s control. If in dealing with the adverse situation, one can escape 
with only the loss of a finger rather than the whole hand (or indeed one’s life), one 
has ‘chosen the greater’ in terms of benefit, and the converse in terms of harm. By 
contrast, in the conduct of one’s affairs, matters that might be taken to be under 
one’s own control, there is an ethical element signified by ‘seeking’. The sentence 
about ‘dying and living’ may mean that there is no real choice in that death is 
shunned and life is chosen inevitably, but clearly there are situations in which this 
might not be true. It may be a statement of the ‘spirit of sacrifice’ of the Mohists, 
referring to Mencius VIIA.26(2) and Zhuangzi 2. 

44.4 Is it right to speak of Heaven’s intention with respect 
to the tyrant? It is his nature to be a tyrant. To attribute this 
to Heaven’s intention is wrong. If the various long- 



established beliefs have already had their effects and I act 
in accordance with these effects, [then] it is the effects of 
those beliefs that cause me to act as I do. If the various 
long-established beliefs have not had their effects and yet I 
act in accordance with these beliefs, then in terms of the 
long-established beliefs, it is through me that there are 
effects. 

Comment: This is very problematic. This version depends particularly on reading 
tian zhi as Heaven’s intention (or will) and chen zhi as long-established beliefs. A 
different view, modifying the first two sentences and moving the first sentence of 
44.5 to this section, makes 44.4 seem to claim, in an unremarkable way, a significant 
role for Heaven’s intention, here in the specific case of the tyrannical or cruel ruler - 
a ‘usurper’. In a third interpretation, a person’s actions are not the ineluctable 
consequences of Heaven’s intention, but are directly attributable to that person’s 
nature, which in turn is not immutable, but is susceptible to change through 
environmental influences; thus, it is at once an argument against a significant role for 
Heaven’s intention in determining human conduct, which has an important bearing 
on the issue of whether or not Master Mo is a utilitarian, and in favour of the 
influence of environmental factors on moral development, the kind of argument 
advanced elsewhere in the Mozi. 


44.5 Hie tyrant says: ‘I am Heaven’s intention’, which is to 
take what people condemn and deem it right, and a nature 
that cannot be corrected and correct it. In choosing the 
greater from what is beneficial, there is an alternative. In 
choosing the lesser from what is harmful, there is no 
alternative. Choosing what one does not yet have is to 
choose the greater from what is beneficial. Casting aside 


what one already has is to choose the lesser from what is 
harmful. 

Comment: There are several issues: its context; the validity of the reading of tian 
zhi as Heaven’s intention (see 44.4); and whether wei (to be) should be read as wei 
(to say) in ‘The tyrant says’. 


44.6 If, according to what is yi (right and dutiful) it is 
permissible to love [someone] ‘thickly’, then love them 
‘thickly’. If, according to what is yi, it is permissible to 
love [someone] ‘thinly’, then love them ‘thinly’. This is to 
speak of ‘the proper sequence’. Virtuous rulers, elders and 
parents are all people one should love ‘thickly’. [However,] 
loving one’s elders ‘thickly’ does not entail loving those 
who are young ‘thinly’. If relations are close, they should 
be loved ‘thickly’; if they are distant, they should be loved 
‘thinly’. One should be on close terms with one’s parents, 
whereas with respect to those other than parents, one may 
love ‘thinly’. It is in accord with principle to love one’s 
parents ‘thickly’. One must look closely at their conduct, 
but hope only to see virtue. 

Comment: Three characters or phrases present some difficulty:^ is understood as 
‘right and dutiful’ (rather than the more usual ‘right action or righteousness’), 
influenced by context and several modem commentators; bo is used in the hou/bo 
(thick/thin) conjunction, but unlike in 44.1, ‘extensive’ or ‘all-embracing’ seems 
inappropriate; and lun lie is translated as ‘proper sequence’, but it could be 
‘without difference of degree’ (see, e.g., Mencius IIIA.5(3)). I have read this section 
as both a statement of Mohist views and a defence against Mencius’ attack 


(IIIB.9(9)) that Master Mo advocates the denial of the preeminence of love for 
one’s father through the acknowledgement of ‘thick’ and ‘thin’ responsibilities 
within the framework of universal love. 


44.7 To [love] Yu ‘thickly’ for the sake of the world is not 
for the sake of his being Yu. To love Yu ‘thickly’ for the 
sake of the world is, in fact, for the sake of Yu’s love of 
man. To hold Yu in esteem for what he does ‘adds to’ the 
world, whereas to hold Yu in esteem (as an individual) does 
not ‘add to’ the world. Likewise, to abominate a robber for 
what he does ‘adds to’ the world, whereas to abominate a 
robber (as an individual) does not ‘add to’ the world. Tire 
love of mankind does not exclude the self, for the self lies 
within that which is loved. If the self lies within that which 
is loved, then love ‘adds to’ the self. There is ‘the proper 
sequence’ in love of the self and love of mankind, (or - 
Love of the self and love of mankind are without 
distinction.) 

Comment: % was one of the ancient exemplary rulers, founder of the Xia 
Dynasty. In the first sentence, I have added fei (a negative), and translated ren ai as 
‘love of man’. Hou is translated as ‘thickly’ except for ‘esteem’ in the third 
sentence. This section continues the discussion of the love/benefit nexus and makes 
two points. The first, based on the contrast between "Yu as the paradigm of the 
virtuous man and a robber as the evil man, is that it is because of their actions that 
people are held in esteem or reviled. There is no ground for a specific response to 
the ‘undefined’ person. It is people’s actions that ‘define’ them. The second is that 
the self should be included in the scope of those who are loved, which would seem 



to be a prerequisite for truly universal love, but is an important point for the 
Mohist to make explicit. 


44.8 The sage is averse to disease and decay; he is not 
averse to danger and difficulty. He maintains the integrity 
of Iris body and the resolve of his heart. He desires the 
people’s benefit; he is not averse to the people’s love. The 
sage does not consider his own dwelling. The sage does not 
concern himself with the affairs of the son. The sage’s 
method is to turn his mind from his parents when they die; 
he does this for the sake of the world. To treat parents 
‘thickly’ is his lot, but when they die he turns his mind from 
them. His whole endeavour is to bring benefit [to the 
world]. When there is ‘thick’ and ‘thin’ and not ‘the proper 
sequence’ (or - ‘no difference of degree’) in bringing about 
benefit, this is for the self. 

Comment: The problem is how to relate this section to what has been said, with 
apparent acceptance, about gradations of love. The sage’s attitude to disease and 
danger is determined only by the extent to which such vicissitudes impede him in 
his bringing of benefit to the people. He sets aside personal concerns, his own 
dwelling (echoes of "Yu here), his sons and mourning for his parents, because they 
would interfere with his purpose. The problem comes when the argument turns to 
the opposite: according special consideration to parents and accepting ‘the proper 
sequence’, which is identified as acting for the self. Even taking the earlier part of 
44.8 to be about the Confucian position is quite unsatisfactory in that it leaves the 
Mohist without a response to Mencius’ challenge. 


44.9 With respect to language, there are constant rules. 
(These include) the following three propositions: negating 
the white horse/horse (argument), not saying that ‘in 
seeking a horse one may direct attention to a foal’ is wrong 
and negating (the argument) that killing a pup is not killing 
a dog. These three things must be set out; then there is 
enough for life. Zang’s loving himself does not make him a 
self-loving person. ‘Thick’ does not exclude the self. Love 
is without distinction between ‘thick’ and ‘thin’. Praising 
oneself is to be unworthy. Yi (right action, righteousness 
and justice) is beneficial; action that is not yi is harmful. 
Intention and outcome are to be distinguished. To have a 
friend on a Qin horse is to have a friend on a horse. One 
knows that what has come is a horse. 

Comment: This is probably the most corrupt section of text in chapter 44. Issues 
about all the sentences are both textual and contextual, e.g. several sentences (first, 
third and ninth) are possibly misplaced and should not be in this section, and 
sentence eight is out of context. 


44.10 Everywhere study the love of people. The love of 
many generations and the love of few generations are the 
same, hr universal love it is also the same. The love of 
former generations and the love of future generations are 
the same as the love of the present generation. Hie world’s 
benefit is pleasing. For the sage there is love and not 
benefit. These are Confucian words; that is to say a 


stranger’s words. Even if the world had no people, the 
words of Master Mo would still remain. 

Comment: There are issues with all the sentences; nevertheless, the section 
appears to be a relatively unadorned statement of the Mohist position on universal 
love contrasted with the Confucian separation of benefit from love. 


44.11 To have no alternative to desiring something is not to 
desire it. [To take it upon oneself to kill Zang] is not to kill 
Zang. To take it upon oneself to kill a robber is not to kill a 
robber. Tire ‘circle’ of a ‘small circle’ and the ‘circle’ of a 
Targe circle’ are the same. Tire ‘not reaching’ of ‘not 
reaching a chi' and the ‘not reaching’ of ‘not reaching a 
thousand IV are not different. That their ‘not reaching’ is the 
same is that far and near are being spoken of. This huang 
(jade ornament) is this jade, but thinking of the huang is 
not thinking of jade. It is thinking of this huang ’s jade. This 
pillar is wood, but thinking of the pillar is not thinking of 
wood. It is thinking of this pillar’s wood. Thinking of a 
person’s finger is not thinking of a person. Thinking of the 
catch of the hunt is, however, thinking of animals. 

Comment: There are numerous difficulties with this section: the first sentence may 
be misplaced, and the second and third are essentially incomprehensible without 
emendation (I have emended and added to them so as to give a meaning which 
relates to the opening sentence). The claim about the circle seems unexceptionable, 
‘circle’ having the same meaning in both instances, whereas ‘not reaching’ has 
different connotations in both. The next pair of sentences are not obviously 
connected: that huang is jade is a completely trivial claim, while if someone thinks 



of a wooden pillar, they don’t think of wood in general, but specifically of the wood 
of the pillar (one emendation). The aim of the final two sentences, particularly if the 
reversal of zhizhi ren (a finger’s person) is adopted as in 44.19, is to make a point 
about the part/whole relationship. 


44.12 Intention and outcome may not follow each other. In 
general, what is praised is loving people and benefiting 
people for the sake of their being people. Enriching people 
is not for the sake of their being people, hi terms of ‘for 
the sake of’, it is by enriching people that one enriches 
people. Bringing order to people is for the sake of ghosts. 
To consider reward and praise to be of benefit to one 
person is not to consider reward and praise to be of benefit 
to mankind, but it also does not mean that one does not 
reward and praise one person. To know a parent is one 
(person) and to benefit (the parent) is not to be filial, but it 
also does not go as far as to mean that one does not know 
that being filial is to benefit one’s parents. 

Comment: The short sentence about ghosts accords with the general tenor of Mozi 
31, and specifically 31.10: ‘in bringing order to the world, the ancient sage kings 
certainly put the ghosts and spirits first and the people second’. 


44.13 You may know there are robbers in this world, but 
still have complete love for this world. You may know there 
is a robber in this house, but not have complete hatred for 
this house. Y>u may know that one of two men is a robber, 
but not have complete hatred for these two men. Although 


one of the men is a robber, if you don’t know which one it 
is, how can you have complete hatred for the associate? 

Comment: The argument is of particular importance to the Mohist: if one 
embraces ‘universal love’, what is one’s position vis-a-vis robbers? Three cases are 
considered; the world, a household and a pair of men. This translation says that 
despite the presence of men whom it is appropriate to dislike within each group, it 
is still possible to love the group as a whole regardless of size. Another view makes 
it a question of dilution in that in the world, the proportion of robbers is small, so 
one can love the world, whereas in the smaller groupings, the proportion is larger, so 
loving completely may not be appropriate. 


44.14 The primary task for all sages must be to establish 
the correspondence of names and entities. Names and 
entities are not necessarily in accord. If this stone is white 
and you break this stone up, its whiteness is the same 
throughout. [If] this stone is large, the same does not apply 
to its largeness. This is the ordinary way of speaking about 
it. With things named on the basis of form and appearance, 
one must know it is this sort of object (entity) and then one 
knows what it is. With things that cannot be named on the 
basis of form and appearance, although one does not know 
it is this sort of object (entity), it is still possible to know 
it. With all things named on the basis of dwelling in or 
departing from, if there is entry into them, they are all this; 
if there is departure from them, they are not this. For 
example, district, village and the kingdoms of Qi and Jing 
are all things named on the basis of dwelling in or departing 



from, while mountains, hills, houses and temples are all 
things named on the basis of form and appearance. 

Comment: There have been four approaches to this very contentious, but critical, 
section: to make the issue of the correspondence of names and objects - of course, 
of central importance to the Later Mohist - the primary task of the sage (as above); 
to treat the sage’s primary responsibility as separate from the issue of names and 
objects, defining it rather as acting for the general good (i.e. for other people), as 
opposed to being guided by self-interest, citing the Yanzi Chunqiu and th eHanfeizi 
(SBCK, vol. 14, p. 29 and vol. 18, p. 89, respectively); to read ming and shi as 
‘reputation’ and ‘practice’, respectively, in the sense used in the Mencius VIB.6(1): 
‘Shun-yu Kuan said: “He who makes fame and meritorious service his first objects 
acts with regards to others” ’; and to make ‘name’ and ‘object’ (‘entity’) the title of 
a separate, hybrid treatise, omitting any reference to the sage’s tasks. 


44.15 Knowing and conceptualizing are different. There is 
the sameness of duplication (two names for the same 
entity). There is the sameness of being together 
(agreement). There is the sameness of being connected 
(components of one body). There is the sameness of the 
same class. There is the sameness of the same name. There 
is the sameness of the same root (origin). Urere is 
sameness related to region (place). Urere is the sameness 
of interdependence. Urere is the sameness of shi (the same 
in reality) and the sameness of ran (the subjective 
impression of sameness). Urere is the difference denoted 
by fei (different in reality) and the difference denoted by 
bu ran (the subjective impression of difference). Urere are 
instances of something’s difference being taken as its 



sameness, and of something’s sameness being taken as its 
difference; these are different. The first is said to be shi 
and ran (so objectively and subjectively). The second is 
said to be bu shi and bit ran (not so objectively and not so 
subjectively). Hie third is said to be qian (a transformation 
or change). The fourth is said to be qiang (a forced 
analogy). 

Comment: The first sentence may be out of place with respect to the argument, 
although that depends on the reading. I have changed the order of the ten bases of 
sameness on the grounds of structure, and more significantly, to allow the grouping 
of statements on shi/fei and ran/bu ran. The statement about difference being taken 
as the same and vice versa presents considerable difficulty. The problems relate to 
context, particularly with respect to what follows. The section concludes with a 
summary of four situations, two desirable and the second two not so: in the first 
two instances, things that are objectively the same or objectively different are 
recognized as being so by the perceiving subject; in the third and fourth, there is 
failure of the objective and subjective to coincide in either direction, for which 
specific terms are offered. 


44.16 With respect to Master Mo’s doctrines, look deeply 
into what is deep and superficially at what is superficial. 
Increase what should be increased; decrease what should be 
decreased. Examine sequence by means of comparison; as 
a consequence one comes to many manifestations. Next, 
examine sounds for the origin of names; as a consequence 
the reality is again made correct. 

Comment: The translation of the first sentence depends on understanding zi as 
referring to Mo Zi (Master Mo) and accepting the emendation of zun (to honour, 


esteem) to the rare character of the same sound which has the meaning of jian (to 
decrease). Then the meaning becomes clear, but the context remains a problem. 


44.17 If a man avoids what he dislikes, others are able to 
ascertain his feelings. In the case of all those who meet 
with life’s vicissitudes, and in whom likes and dislikes 
arise, others are not necessarily able to ascertain their 
feelings. 

Comment: There are considerable problems with these two sentences, involving 
both text and context. I have made it a separate section. 

44.18 The nurturing of the sage is based on ren (love, 
kindness, humaneness and benevolence) and not on benefit 
and love. Benefit and love arise from consideration. Tire 
consideration of former times is not the consideration of 
the present day. Love of Huo as loving another arises from 
considering Huo’s benefit and not from considering Zang’s 
benefit. Yet loving Zang as loving another is the same as 
loving Huo as loving another. If doing away with loving 
them brings benefit to the world, can one not do away with 
it? lire knowledge of frugality in former times was not like 
that of the present day. Hre Son of Heaven may be rich, but 
in his bringing benefit to the people, he is not more 
generous than the ordinary man. [Suppose there are] two 
sons serving their parents. One may meet with a good year 
and the other a bad year yet, in benefiting their parents, they 



are the same. It is not that the former’s benefiting is 
increased (by the good year) and the latter’s diminished (by 
the bad year). External circumstances cannot determine the 
generosity of their benefiting. If the death of Zang were to 
bring harm to the world, although I might support and 
nurture Zang ten-thousandfold, my love for him would not 
be any greater. 

Comment: This section returns to the issues addressed at length in the first 
sections of chapter 44: the relationship between love and benefit; the Mohist 
definition of ‘seeking’; the independence of one’s endeavours in these areas to 
changes of external circumstances; and somewhat obliquely, the matter of choosing 
in relation to benefit and harm. To give the sixth sentence as a rhetorical question 
adds to its force; alternatively bu (a negative) could be added. 


44.19 Atall man and a short man are the same; their 
appearance is the same, therefore they are the same. A 
man’s head and a man’s finger are different. (The parts ol) a 
man’s body are not of one appearance, therefore they are 
different. A jiang sword and a ting sword are different. 
Swords are named according to form and appearance. Their 
form is not the same, therefore they are different. Hie 
wood of the willow tree and the wood of the peach tree are 
the same. With respect to all things which are not named on 
the basis of measurement and number, when broken up they 
are completely uniform, therefore they are the same. One 
man’s zhi (represention, manifestation) is not the man 


himself, yet this one (particular) man’s zhi is, in fact, this 
one (particular) man. One surface of a cube is not a cube. A 
cube of wood’s surface is a cube of wood. Aperson’s spirit 
is not the person. An older brother’s spirit is the older 
brother. 

Comment: This section seems to signal a return to the issues of sameness and 
difference and their relation to naming, addressed in 44.11: things named on the basis 
of form and appearance, providing they conform to the essential requirements of the 
class, can be subsumed under the class name, e.g. swords and men, despite their 
wide variation in actual appearance. The remaining examples are an odd assortment. 
The sentence about the wood of the two types of tree might be about the word 
‘tree’ in the two descriptions and belong with similar observations about circles and 
distances. Likewise, the sentence about the uniformity of some properties within an 
object may be more appropriate in conjunction with the discussion of large and 
white in 44.14. The two separate claims involving zhi are bedevilled not only by the 
uncertainty about this word itself, but also the reading of zhi zhi ren (a finger’s 
person) in the second sentence. The argument about the cube of wood is clarified by 
Cao Yaoxiang: ‘In establishing a cube there are altogether six surfaces. One surface is 
not sufficient for it to be deemed a cube (but), if the cube is of wood, then from 
seeing one surface it is possible to know the rest’ ( MoziJian , MZJC 17). The 
probable relationship to the one surface of a cube is that one need only see a part of 
something, under some circumstances, to be able to infer that it is that thing The 
final two sentences are repeated in 45.9. 

44.20 Statements (propositions) originate from causes, 
grow according to reasons (principles, patterns) and 
proceed according to similarities (kinds, classes). To put 
forward statements (propositions) without a clear 
understanding of the causes from which they arise is 


foolish. If people do not follow the road (comply with 
principles), there is no way forward. Although there may be 
strength in the limbs, if there is no clear understanding of 
the road (principles), then obstacles may arise to halt 
progress. If statements (propositions) are set up without 
there being clarity about similarities (kinds, classes), there 
will be difficulty for sure. 

Comment: There are problems with the interpretation of the key terms: ci 
(statements, propositions, words), gu (causes), li (principles, patterns, coherence), 
lei (kinds, classes) and dao (the Way, a road, to say). The uncertainties of placement 
and structure concern how the section starts and how it ends, where (i.e. in relation 
to what) it is placed, and the sentence ‘These three thing? (san wii )... for life’, 
which appears in 44.9 but may belong here. Clearly, interpretation depends on the 
structural arrangement decided upon and especially on context. If we focus on what 
is actually being claimed, it does seem that if fu ci (statements originate) is accepted 
as being the opening, three claims are being made about ci: that they arise through 
gu, are extended or develop through li, and are put into action on the basis of lei. 

But what do these terms signify here? The final three sentences elaborate the claims. 

44.21 

1. Statements (propositions) gradually soak in; the analogy lies in the 
making of startling claims. 

2. The sage acts for the sake of the world; the analogy lies in overcoming 
doubt. 

3. One person may live a long life, another may die [young], yet their 
benefiting the world may be the same; the analogy lies in praising the 
name. 

4. In the space of one day a million things come forth, yet love is not, 
thereby, more profound: the analogy lies in the abhorrence of harm. 


5. In the love for the two ages there is the ‘thick’ and the ‘thin’, yet the 
love for the two ages is the same; the analogy lies in snakes intertwined. 

6. Although all are loved equally, one man may be chosen and killed; the 
analogy lies in a rat in a hole. 

7. Small ren (loving kindness, humanity, benevolence) and great ren have the 
same ‘weight’ in action; the analogy lies in the towel and the table. 

8. Promote benefit and do away with harm; the analogy lies in stopping a 
leak. 

9. In loving one’s parents ‘thickly’, do not consider their conduct but who 
they are; the analogy lies in the well above the river. 

10. One may learn not to be selfish; the analogy lies in the hunter’s pursuit. 

11. The love of man is not about being praised; the analogy lies in the 
innkeeper. 

12. Love for the parents of others is like love for one’s own parents; the 
analogy lies in the concern for the general good. 

13. Universal love is alike; the one love is alike. The one love is alike; the 
analogy lies in dying (killing the snake). 

Comment: The standard version of chapter 44 concludes with this series of 
thirteen statements, but they are sometimes attached to 44.9 or 44.20 - or even 
made completely separate. Number 1 is odd, both in subject matter and in 
containing (variably) the preposition yu (in, at) in the analogy (shared with number 
2). Certainly 2-13 pertain to matters dealt with elsewhere in this chapter, while 3- 
13 are all on ethical matters, reiterating some of the key points made earlier: the 
importance of (universal) love and its relationship to benefit; the somewhat 
equivocal stance on whether gradations of love are permissible; the promotion of 
benefit and eschewing of harm; that love and benefit are independent of external 
circumstances; that goodness may be acquired; and that the evil person may be 
singled out and punished without invalidating the principle of universal love. 


45 


The Lesser Choosing 
( Xiaoqu ) 


45.1 Bian is concerned with the following: (i) clarifying 
distinctions between right and wrong (true and false); (ii) 
investigating periods of order and disorder; (iii) clarifying 
decisions on sameness and difference; (iv) examining 
principles of name and entity; (v) judging benefit and harm; 
(vi) resolving doubt and uncertainty It includes what is so 
of the form and outline of the ten thousand things, and 
discussion and analysis of the comparisons of the many 
words. It is through names that entities are picked out; it is 
through words/phrases that concepts are expressed; it is 
through explanations that causes emerge; it is through kinds 
(classes) that choices are made; it is through kinds 
(classes) that inferences are drawn. What one has in 



oneself, one does not criticize in others; what one does not 
have in oneself, one does not demand in others. 

Comment: This provides a clear and comprehensive definition of the key term bian 
which may be understood as disputation, making distinctions, dialectics or logical 
analysis. For a more restricted use, see A75. 


45.2 ‘To doubt’ is about what is not complete. ‘To suppose’ 
is about what is presently not so. ‘To liken to’ is about 
taking something as a model. What is likened to is 
therefore taken as the model. Thus, if there is 
correspondence in the likening, it is so, and if there is not 
correspondence in the likening, it is not so. This is what 
‘likening to’ is. ‘Comparing’ (pi) is putting forward one 
thing to make another thing clear. ‘Equating’ ( mou ) is 
taking one term to be equivalent to another. ‘Drawing an 
analogy’ (yuan ) is to say: ‘If this is so why should I be the 
only one for whom it is not so?’ ‘Inferring’ (tui) is to take 
what has not been ascertained and identify it with what has 
been ascertained, and so make ajudgement. This is like 
saying: ‘The other is the same’, so how can I say: ‘The other 
is different’? 

Comment: There are two issues: how the opening character should be read, as huo 
(someone, something) or as yi (to doubt); and secondly, whether gu is to be read 
simply as ‘therefore’ or is itself a term, and whether the seven or eight terms 
(depending on the inclusion of gu or otherwise) are equivalent in the sense of being 
‘seven ways of establishing a statement’, or if there is a division of either 3/4 or 2- 
3/5. The continuity of argument and the correspondence of enumerations are 


probably best preserved by the 3/4 division, with the four terms specifically 
identified as methods of reasoning: pi (comparing), mou (equating), yuan (citing, 
drawing an analogy) and tui (inducing, inferring). 


45.3 With respect to things, there is that by which they are 
the same yet not completely the same (i.e. pi). In equating 
terms, there is a proper limit to be reached (i.e. mou). 

(With things,) there is their being so and there is how they 
come to be so. In their being so they may be the same, but 
how they come to be so is not necessarily the same (i.e. 
yuan). (With things,) there is their being chosen and there 
is that by which they are chosen. In their being chosen they 
may be the same, but in that by which they are chosen they 
are not necessarily the same (i.e. tui). For this reason, with 
the terms comparing, equating, drawing an analogy and 
inferring, (there maybe) differences as they proceed, 
dangers as they change, failure as they go too far and 
‘slippage’ as they leave their basis. One must, then, be 
careful; one cannot expect constancy of use. Thus, if you 
say that there are many methods, and that different classes 
have different causes, it is not possible to take a prejudiced 
viewpoint. 

Comment: This section, in effect, lists possible pitfalls in the application of the 
four methods outlined in 45.2. Although in things compared there are necessarily 
points of identity, the entities are not strictly identical, so the comparison may 
break down. In equating terms, similarity of form clearly does not guarantee 
security of conclusion. In recognizing identical outcomes (existing states) one cannot 


infer identity of causes, and in making inferences there are difficulties in so far as 
inferences may be accepted without the reasons for acceptance being the same. 

45.4 With respect to things (the following apply): 

1. Sometimes it is this and is so. 

2. Sometimes it is this and yet is not so. 

3. Sometimes it is not this and yet is so. 

4. Sometimes it is general in one case but not general in another case. 

5. Sometimes it is this in one case but not this in another case. 

Comment: Tan Jiefu, in his Mobian Fawei (MZJC 35), focuses on these five 
propositions as individually exemplified in 45.5-9, and moves 45.4 to make it the 
opening statement of the chapter, which becomes in its entirety the list of 
propositions and their subsequent exemplification. 

45.5 Awhite horse is ahorse. To ride a white horse is to 
ride a horse. Ablack horse is a horse. To ride a black horse 
is to ride a horse. Huo is a person. To love Huo is to love a 
person. Zang is a person. To love Zang is to love a person. 
These are examples of ‘it is this and is so’. 

Comment: Illustrates the first case in 45.4 with two examples, each duplicated. It 
should be noted that the pairs differ somewhat in that both members of the first 
pair have a qualifying adjective preceding the initial substantive. While there are 
obvious elements of the Later Mohist opposition to the arguments of Gongsun 
Long, the main purpose is to establish this form of proposition in contrast to what 
follows, which has critical ethical connotations for the Mohists. 


45.6 Huo’s parents are people, but Huo’s serving his 
parents is not serving people. His younger brother is a 



beautiful person, but loving his younger brother is not 
loving a beautiful person. A cart is wood, but riding a cart is 
not riding wood. Aboat is wood, but boarding a boat is not 
boarding wood. Arobber is a person, but many robbers are 
not many people. There not being robbers doesn’t mean 
there are not people. How can this be made clear? To 
dislike there being many robbers is not to dislike there 
being many people. To wish there were no robbers is not to 
wish there were no people. The world is united in its 
agreement that this is so. If it is so, then although (one 
says): ‘Arobber is a person; loving a robber is not loving a 
person; not loving a robber isn’t not loving a person; killing 
a robber is not killing a person’, there is no difficulty. This 
and that are both of the same class. Nevertheless, the 
people of the world believe that and consider themselves 
not mistaken, whereas the Mohists believe this and 
everyone else considers them mistaken. This is without 
good reason and may be spoken of as being fixed with 
respect to what is within and unreceptive to what is without 
(i.e. as having a closed mind that is not susceptible to 
change). These are instances of ‘it is this and yet is not so’. 

Comment: Examples of the second case in 45.4. Despite the identity in the form of 
the argument, the conclusion may be either true (ran) or false (bu ran). The two 
cases may be set out: 


Case I: Premise 1: Huo is a person. 


Premise 2: What is loved is Huo. 

Conclusion: What is loved is a person. 

Case II: Premise 1: Huo’s parents are people. 

Premise 2: What Huo serves are his parents. 

Conclusion: What Huo serves are people. 

While all would accept the first case and from the logical point of view the second 
too seems irrefutable, it could still be challenged at an interpretative level: i.e. what 
Huo serves are his parents qua parents not his parents qua people. Hu Shi’s 
attempt to dissolve the problem by a piece of linguistic sleight of hand, reading^/ 
(not) as yiyu (different from) rather than bu shi (not this). Does the Mohist 
position hold up, at least sufficiently to provide support for the argument for 
universal love and defence for the punishment of robbers despite their being people, 
or is it a piece of sophistry, as Xun Zi would claim (Xunzi 22.3a)? No one can deny 
that there are some, perhaps ultimately indefinable, differences between killing a 
robber and killing a person (assuming the person in question is not a robber), just as 
there is a difference between killing a pup and killing a dog, although all would 
accept that a pup is a dog, in so far as pup is a subclass of the larger class dog, just 
as robber is a subclass of the larger class people. It is notable, however, that the 
ethical connotations are present only in the second case. Thus, one might conclude 
that while the Mohist defence is not secure on logical grounds, in practice it can be 
justified by awareness of the nuances that escape the strictly logical formulation and 
that such nuances have a wider range than just the group of Mohist ethical 
formulations. 

45.7 Being about to read a book is not reading a book. 
Liking to read a book is reading a book. There being about 
to be a cockfight is not a cockfight. Liking cockfighting is 
for there to be cockfighting. Being about to enter a well is 
not entering a well. To stop being about to enter a well is to 
stop entering a well. Being about to go out a door is not 



going out a door. To stop being about to go out a door is to 
stop going out a door. If it is thus (then one may say): 

‘Being about to die young is not dying young; living a long 
time is not dying young.’ To consider there to be Fate does 
not mean there is Fate and ‘to reject fatalism is to reject 
Fate’ is without difficulty. This and that are of the same 
class. Hie people of the world believe that and do not 
consider themselves mistaken, whereas the Mohists 
believe this and everyone else considers them mistaken. 
This is without good reason and may be spoken of as being 
fixed with respect to what is within and unreceptive to what 
is without (i.e. as having a closed mind that is not 
susceptible to change). Tliese are examples of ‘not this and 
yet is so’. 

Comment: Examples of the third case in 45.4. However, there are significant textual 
concerns in the second, fourth, ninth and final sentences. Overall the section is a 
statement against fatalism - anti-fatalism being one of the main planks of the 
Mohist construction and important in the opposition between Confucianism and 
Mohism- with the argument taking the form of demonstrating two parallel phrases 
or propositions, the first of which is ‘not so’ and the second of which is ‘so’. What 
is not clear is precisely how the two paired propositions under scrutiny equate with 
the preceding four examples to establish the argument if, indeed, it is one argument 
(i.e. a denial of fate) or two. 

45.8 Loving people awaits universally loving people and 
afterwards becomes loving people. Not loving people does 
not await universally not loving people. Not universally 


loving is a consequence of not loving people. Riding horses 
does not await universally riding horses (riding all horses) 
for there subsequently to be riding horses. There is riding 
on a horse and as a consequence there is riding horses. 
When it comes to not riding horses, this does not await a 
universal not riding of horses (not riding all horses) for 
there subsequently to be not riding horses. These are 
examples of ‘one generalized’ (universal) and ‘one not 
generalized’ (not universal). 

Comment: Examples of the fourth proposition in 45.4. There are two cases that 
are susceptible of grammatically identical description. The Mohist point is that this 
grammatical identity obscures differences that are important to another central 
Mohist tenet, the possibility and desirability of universal love. In the first case, 
loving people, to satisfy the requirements of the description one needs to love all 
people all the time, i.e. universal love. Failing to love even one person at any time 
invalidates the description. In the second case, riding horses, to satisfy the 
requirements one need only ride some horse(s) some of the time, whereas the 
conditions for non-applicability require not riding any horse at any time. In these 
two parallel phrases with essentially identical structure, one is generalized and one 
is not. 


45.9 If you live in a state, it is deemed the state you live in. 
If you have one house in a state, you are not deemed to have 
the state. The fruit of the peach tree is the peach; the fruit 
of the ji tree is not the ji. To ask about a person’s illness is 
to ask about the person; to dislike a person’s illness is not 
to dislike the person. Aperson’s spirit is not the person; an 
older brother’s spirit is the older brother. To sacrifice to a 


person’s spirit is not to sacrifice to the person; to sacrifice 
to the older brother’s spirit is to sacrifice to the older 
brother. If this horse’s eyes are blind, we call it a blind 
horse. If this horse’s eyes are large, we don’t call it a large 
horse. If this ox’s hairs are yellow, we call it a yellow ox. If 
this ox’s hairs are many, we don’t call it many oxen. One 
horse is ‘horse’. Two horses are ‘horse’. With respect to a 
horse and four legs, there is one horse and four legs, not 
two horses and four legs. Awhite horse is a horse. With 
respect to some horses being white, there are (at least) two 
horses and some are (one is) white, not one horse and 
some are (one is) white. These, then, are instances of one 
being so and one not being so. 

Comment: Examples of the fifth proposition in 45.4. This section is about the 
limits and principles of the use of natural language, but is different from the 
preceding sections in that there is no obvious attempt to support any particular 
Mohist doctrine. Moreover, the examples are quite diverse and the section as a 
whole does not seem to correlate as well as the other sections with the listing of 
possible errors in the application of the terms in 45.3 and 45.4. This section is 
relatively straightforward with respect to the examples, all six of which are 
subsumed under the heading of ‘one is, one is not’. The first depends on the 
possibility of giving a verb an adjectival role in the first case but not being able to do 
so in the second. The second is simply a matter of usage: the fruit of the peach tree 
is the peach but the fruit of the ji tree (jujube tree (Zizyphus vulgaris )) is not the ji 
but the zao (date). The third is about the ‘scope’ of verbs in relation to direct and 
indirect objects and to transitive and intransitive forms. In the fourth example, the 
explanation hinges on the fact that after a man’s death, necessary for the existence of 
his spirit, he can no longer be deemed a man, whereas the spirit of the older brother 
is linked only to that brother, so the two can be equated, this being particularly 


relevant in sacrificing to the spirit. The fifth example is about the scope of 
descriptive terms: if a horse’s eyes are blind or an ox’s hair is yellow, they can be 
called a blind horse and a yellow ox, but the descriptive terms ‘large’ and ‘many’ 
cannot have the same dual application to part and whole. In the final example, one 
view is that the distinction is simply between singular and plural, a distinction often 
not explicit in written Chinese. Graham, however, says that it ‘is not between 
singular and plural but between distributive and collective, which is not exhibited by 
Indo-European number’. This example clearly also has relevance to Gongsun Long’s 
‘white horse’ argument and the Later Mohist response to this. 




Part IV 


THE DIALOGUES 



46 


Geng Zhu 


46.1 Master Mo was angry with Geng Zhuzi. 1 

Geng Zhuzi asked him: ‘Am I not better than other men?’ 
Master Mo asked: ‘If I were about to ascend Taihang 
Mountain, and yoked a thoroughbred horse and an ox [to my 
cart], which one would I urge on?’ 

Geng Zhuzi replied: ‘You would urge on the 
thoroughbred horse.’ 

Master Mo asked: ‘And why would I urge on the 
thoroughbred horse?’ 

Geng Zhuzi replied: ‘Because the thoroughbred horse is 
up to the task.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘I also take you to be up to the task.’ 

46.2 Wu Mazi 2 spoke to Master Mo, saying: ‘Which are 
more perspicacious and wise - ghosts and spirits or sages?’ 


Master Mo said: ‘Comparing the perspicacity and 
wisdom of ghosts and spirits to that of sages is like 
comparing those with sharp hearing and clear sight to those 
who are deaf and blind. In the past, the Xia king, Kai (Qi), 
sent Fei Lian to search for metals in the mountains and 
rivers and to cast tripods (ding) at Kun Wu. He also 
ordered Wengnan Yi 3 to prognosticate from the bairuo 
tortoise. The diviner said: “When the tripods are complete, 
they will have four legs and be square. Without fire, they 
will cook by themselves. Without lifting, they will store 
themselves. Without being moved, they will move 
themselves. Use them for sacrifice at Kun Wu and let the 
god receive the offering.” After interpreting the lines, he 
also said: ‘Tire god received the offering. Hie white clouds 
are all over the place - one in the south, one in the north, 
one in the west and one in the east. The nine tripods are 
already complete and will pass to the three kingdoms.” 
[Subsequently,] the Xia ruler’s clan lost them and the Yin 
(Shang) founder received them. The Yin lost them and the 
Zhou founder received them. This transmission between 
the Xia ruler and the Yin and Zhou founders went on over 
several hundred years. Even if a sage were to gather 
together his good officials and excellent ministers and 
plan, how could he know what would transpire after several 
hundred years? And yet ghosts and spirits know! This is why 


I say that the perspicacity and wisdom of ghosts and spirits 
are like sharp hearing and keen sight compared to deafness 
and blindness.’ 

46.3 Zhi Tuyu and Xian Zishuo 4 questioned Master Mo, 
saying: ‘In practising yi (right action, righteousness and 
justice), what is the most important aspect?’ 

Master Mo said: ‘It is like building a wall. Let those who 
are able to compact the earth, compact it; let those who are 
able to carry the earth, carry it; and let those who are able 
to make the measurements, make them. Then the wall will 
be completed. Practising yi is like this. Let those who are 
able to dispute, dispute; let those who are able to explain 
the writings, explain them; and let those who are able to 
conduct affairs, conduct them. Thenyz will be completed.’ 

46.4 Wu Mazi spoke to Master Mo, saying: ‘You practise 
universal love for all under Heaven, but as yet there is no 
benefit. I don’t practise universal love for all under Heaven, 
but as yet there is no harm. In neither case has anything 
been achieved yet. How can you claim that you alone are 
right and I am wrong?’ 

Master Mo said: ‘Now suppose someone lights a fire and 
one man is bringing water which he will pour on it and 
another is gathering fuel with which he will increase it. In 


neither case has anything been achieved yet, so which of 
the two men will you commend?’ 

Wu Mazi said: ‘I regard the intention of the one who is 
bringing water as right and that of the one who is gathering 
fuel as wrong.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘I also regard my intention as right and 
your intention as wrong.’ 

46.5 Master Mo recommended Geng Zhuzi for office in 
Chu. Several of the Master’s disciples visited Geng Zhuzi 
who gave them only three sheng [of rice] to eat and 
entertained them in a meagre fashion. 

Hie disciples returned and said to Master Mo: ‘Geng 
Zhuzi’s position in Chu doesn’t benefit him. Several of us 
visited him and he only gave us three sheng [of rice] to eat 
and entertained us in a meagre fashion.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘One cannot tell yet.’ 

A little while later Geng Zhuzi sent 10 pieces of gold to 
Master Mo, saying: ‘I, your disciple, dare not keep this for 
myself. Here are 10 pieces of gold which I wish you, sir, to 
use.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘As I thought, it was too soon to tell.’ 

46.6 Wu Mazi spoke to Master Mo, saying: ‘You, sir, 
practise yi, but people don’t see you and yield to you; 



ghosts don’t see you and bless you. And yet you do it. You 
must be mad!’ 

Master Mo said: ‘Now suppose you had two attendants - 
one who carried out his duties when he saw you, but not 
when he didn’t see you, and one who carried out his duties 
whether he saw you or not. Which of these two men would 
you value?’ 

Wu Mazi replied: ‘I would value the one who carried out 
his duties whether he saw me or not.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘Then in that case, you would also be 
valuing one who is mad! ’ 

46.7 Afollower of Zixia 5 questioned Master Mo saying: ‘Is 
there contention among noble men?’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘There is no contention among noble 
men.’ 

Zixia’s follower said: ‘There is contention even among 
dogs and pigs, so how is there is no contention among 
officers?’ 

Master Mo said: ‘What a shame! With regard to words, 
you praise Tang and Wen, but with regard to actions, you 
make comparison to dogs and pigs. What a shame! ’ 

46.8 Wu Mazi spoke to Master Mo, saying: ‘To set aside 
men of the present and praise former kings is to praise old 


bones. It is like a carpenter only knowing dried wood and 
not knowing the living tree.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘Hie way the world lives is through the 
doctrines and teachings of the former kings. Now to praise 
the former kings is to praise the way the world lives. Not to 
praise what may be praised is to negate ren (love, kindness, 
humaneness and benevolence).’ 

46.9 Master Mo said: ‘He Shi’s jade, Marquis Sui’s pearl 6 
and the nine tripods are what the feudal lords spoke of as 
excellent treasures. But can they enrich the country, make 
the people numerous, bring order to the govermnent and 
peace to the nation? I say they cannot. Something is said to 
be valued as an excellent treasure because it can benefit the 
people. However, He Shi’s jade, Marquis Sui’s pearl and the 
nine tripods cannot benefit people, so in terms of the world 
they are not excellent treasures. Now if yi is used in 
governing the country, the people will certainly be 
numerous, the government will certainly be well ordered 
and the nation will certainly be at peace. What is said to be 
valued as an excellent treasure is what can benefit the 
people, and yi can benefit people. Hierefore, I say that yi is 
the world’s excellent treasure.’ 


46.10 The Duke of She, Zi Gao, 7 asked Confucius about 
government, saying: ‘What constitutes skill in governing?’ 

Confucius replied: ‘Skill in governing consists of 
becoming close to those who are distant and renewing old 
friendships.’ 

On hearing this, Master Mo said: ‘The Duke of She, Zi 
Gao, did not hit on the right question, so Confucius had no 
proper way of answering him. How could the Duke of She, 
Zi Gao, not know that skill in governing consisted of 
bringing near those who are distant and renewing old 
friendships? His question should have been how to do this. 
It was not, then, a case of telling him something he did not 
know, but of telling him what he already knew. That is why I 
say that the Duke of She, Zi Gao, did not hit on the right 
question, so Confucius was unable to frame the right reply.’ 

46.11 Master Mo spoke to Prince Wen of Luyang, 8 saying: 
‘A large state attacking a small state is like a young boy 
playing at being a horse. When he plays at being a horse, he 
tires out his legs. Now when a large state attacks a small 
state, farmers in the state being attacked cannot plough and 
women cannot weave because they are occupied with 
defence. And in the case of those who are attacking, 
farmers also cannot plough and women cannot weave 
because they are occupied with attack. Therefore, a large 


state attacking a small state is like a young boy playing at 
being ahorse.’ 

46.12 Master Mo said: ‘Words that are good enough to put 
into practice, use frequently. Words that aren’t good 
enough to put into practice, do not use frequently. Words 
that aren’t good enough to put into practice yet are 
frequently used are a waste of breath. ’ 

46.13 Master Mo sent Guan Qian’ao to promote Gao Shizi 
in Wei. The Prince of Wei gave him a substantial salary and 
established him among the high officials. Gao Shizi entered 
the court three times and each time offered his counsels 
fully, but his words were not acted upon. He left and went 
to Qi. There he saw Master Mo, to whom he said: ‘Because 
of you the Prince of Wei gave me a substantial salary and 
established me among the high officials. I went to the court 
on three occasions and each time offered my counsels 
fully, but my words were not acted upon. That is why I left. 
Would the Prince of Wei take me to be mad?’ 

Master Mo said: ‘Leaving was in accord with the Way. 
What harm is there in being thought mad? In ancient times, 
Duke Dan of Zhou opposed Guan Shu. 9 He resigned from 
his position as one of the Three Dukes 10 and went east to 
live in Shangyan. People all called him mad. Yet later 


generations extolled Iris virtue and praise for his name has 
extended right to the present time. Moreover, I have heard 
that being yi doesn’t involve avoiding censure and seeking 
praise. So leaving was in accord with the Way. What harm is 
there in being thought mad?’ 

Gao Shizi said, ‘I left. How could I dare not to follow the 
Way? Formerly you, Master, said these words: “If the world 
is without the Way, officers who are ren should not accept 
a substantial salary.” Now the Prince of Wei is without the 
Way, so if I were to desire salary and position from him, 
this would just be taking food from the people.’ 

Master Mo was pleased and summoned Master Qin, 11 
saying: ‘Now I have heard this! I have often heard of those 
who turn their backs on yi and turn towards salary. But 
turning one’s back on salary and turning towards yi, I have 
seen only in Gao Shizi.’ 

46.14 Master Mo said: ‘It is customary among noble men 
that if you say they are rich when they are poor, they 
become indignant. But if you say they are yi when they are 
not, they are pleased. Is this not perverse?’ 

46.15 Gongmeng Zi 12 said: ‘The first people had three 
principles and that is all.’ 


Master Mo asked: ‘Who were the first people whom you 
say had only three principles? You don’t know what the first 
people had.’ 

46.16 Among his disciples there was one who forsook 
Master Mo but later returned, saying: ‘How am I at fault? I 
did return.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘This is like the three armies being 
defeated and those who have lost their way or lagged behind 
seeking reward.’ 

46.17 Gongmeng Zi said: ‘Tire noble man does not create; 
he transmits and that is all.’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘Not so. Those who are the most 
ignoble don’t transmit what was good in the past and don’t 
do what is good in the present. Those who are the next most 
ignoble don’t transmit what was good in the past, but if they 
themselves possess goodness, they reveal it in the hope 
that it will redound to their credit. Now there is no 
difference between transmitting but not creating, and not 
wanting to transmit yet creating. In my view, if something 
was good in the past, transmit it. And if something is good 
in the present, do it in the hope that the good will be greatly 
increased.’ 



46.18 Wu Mazi spoke to Master Mo, saying: ‘I am 
different from you. I am not able to love universally. I love 
the people of Zou more than I love the people of Yue. I love 
the people of Lu more than I love the people of Zou. I love 
the people of my district more than I love the people of Lu. 
I love the people of my family more than I love the people 
of my district. I love my parents more than I love the 
people of my family. I love myself more than I love my 
parents. This is all based on the closeness to myself. If 
another strikes me, I feel the pain, but if I strike another, 
the pain is not mine. Wiry, then, should I not prefer the pain 
of striking another to the pain of being struck myself? This 
is why I would kill another to benefit myself rather than be 
killed myself to benefit another.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘Is your way of thinking to be kept 
secret or is it to be told to others?’ 

Wu Mazi replied: ‘Why should I keep my way of thinking 
a secret? I shall tell it to others.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘In that case, if one person agrees with 
you, one person will want to kill you to benefit himself. If 
ten people agree with you, ten people will want to kill you 
to benefit themselves. If everyone in the world agrees with 
you, everyone in the world will want to kill you to benefit 
themselves. If one person does not agree with you, that one 
person will want to kill you, taking you to be a person who 



spreads evil words. If ten people do not agree with you, 
these ten people will want to kill you, taking you to be a 
person who spreads evil words. If everyone in the world 
does not agree with you, everyone in the world will want to 
kill you, taking you to be a person who spreads evil words. 
Then not only those who agree with you will want to kill 
you but also those who don’t agree with you will want to 
kill you. This is to say that what brings about the killing is 
the mouth, but what is killed is the person.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘What benefit is there in your words? If 
you must speak, although you have nothing of benefit to 
say, you are wasting your breath.’ 

46.19 Master Mo spoke to Prince Wen of Luyang, saying: 
‘Now suppose there is this person who cannot consume all 
the food from grain-fed sheep and oxen that his kitchen- 
master skins and cuts, and prepares for him, yet when he 
sees someone else preparing cakes, he suddenly seizes 
them, saying, “Give them to me to eat.” Don’t you know 
whether this is a case of his not being satisfied with what he 
has to eat or of his being a pathological thief?’ 

Prince Wen of Luyang replied: ‘He is [obviously] a 
pathological thief.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘Chu had fields extending to its four 
borders that were overgrown and neglected and could not 



be opened up. And it had vacant land to the extent of several 
thousand [acres] that could not be completely used. Yet 
when it saw the unoccupied regions of Song and Zheng, it 
suddenly seized them. How is this different from the first 
case?’ 

Prince Wen of Luyang replied: ‘This is just like the 
other. It is truly pathological theft.’ 

46.20 Master Mo said: ‘Jisun Shao and Meng Bochang 13 
conducted the government of the state of Lu but were 
unable to trust each other, so they swore an oath at the 
temple altar, saying, “Cause us to be harmonious.” This is 
like people covering their eyes and swearing an oath at the 
temple altar, saying, “Cause us to see everything.” Is this 
not absurd?’ 

46.21 Master Mo spoke to Luo Guli, saying: ‘I hear you 
love bravery.’ 

Luo Guli replied: ‘That is so. Whenever I hear there is a 
district that has a brave knight in it, I must follow him and 
kill him.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘In the world, there is nobody who does 
not wish to foster what he loves and discard what he hates. 
Now when you hear there is a district with a brave knight in 


it, you must follow him and kill him. This isn’t loving 
bravery; this is hating bravery.’ 



47 


Valuing Yi 
(Gui Yi) 


47.1 Master Mo said: ‘Of the ten thousand things, there is 
none more valuable than yi (right action, righteousness and 
justice). Now suppose you were to speak to someone and 
say, “I shall give you a cap and shoes, but I shall cut off your 
hands and feet: do you accept this?” He would certainly not 
accept it. For what reason? Because caps and shoes are not 
like hands and feet in terms of value. Again, suppose you 
were to say, “I shall give you the world, but I shall kill you 
as a person: do you accept this?” He would certainly not 
accept it. For what reason? Because the world is not like 
one’s own person in terms of value. And yet people contend 
over a single word (i.e. yi) and take this as a reason to kill 
each other. This is to value yi more than one’s own person. 



That is why I say that of the ten thousand things, there is 
none more valuable than yi.' 

47.2 Master Mo was going from Lu to Qi when he met an 
old friend who spoke to him, saying: ‘Nowadays, nobody in 
the world is yi. Tbu are only inflicting pain on yourself by 
being yi. Better that you stop.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘Now suppose there was a man here 
who had ten sons, one of whom ploughed while the other 
nine stayed at home. The one who ploughed could not help 
but work with increased urgency. Why is this? It is because 
those who eat are many, but those who plough are few. 
Nowadays, nobody in the world is yi, so you should be 
encouraging me. Why would you stop me?’ 

47.3 Master Mo travelled south to Chu to present a 
document to King Hui but the King declined to see him on 
the grounds of age. Instead, he sent Mu He to receive 
Master Mo. 

Master Mo spoke to Mu He who was very pleased. He 
addressed Master Mo, saying: ‘Your words, sir, are truly 
excellent but our ruler is a great king in the world. Would 
he not say, “This is what only a lowly man would do”, and 
not use the document?’ 



Master Mo said: ‘It is simply a question of efficacy. 
Compare the case of a medicine. It may only be the root of 
a herb and yet the Son of Heaven will take it to cure his 
sickness. Does he say, ‘This is just the root of a single 
herb” and not take it? Now the farmer pays his taxes to the 
great officer and the great officer makes sweet wine and 
millet for sacrifices to the Supreme Lord and to ghosts and 
spirits. Do they say, “This was made by a lowly man” and so 
not accept it? Hierefore, although the man may be lowly, at 
one level he is comparable to the farmer and at another 
level he is comparable to a medicine. Is he not ultimately 
like the root of a single herb? Moreover, has the ruler not 
also previously heard the story of Tang? Long ago, Tang was 
about to go and see Yi Yin. 1 He ordered the son of the Peng 
family to drive the chariot. They were halfway along the 
road when the son of the Peng family asked: “Where is 
your lordship going?” Tang replied: T am on my way to see 
Yi Yin.” The son of the Peng family said: “Yi Yin is one of 
the lowly people of the world. If your lordship wishes to 
see him, just send him a summons and he will take it as an 
honour.” Tang replied: ‘This is not something you know 
about. Now suppose there was this medicine which if I took 
it would make my hearing more acute and my vision 
sharper. Then I would certainly be happy to force myself to 
take it. Now with respect to my country, Yi Yin is like a 


good doctor or an excellent medicine. Your not wishing me 
to go and see Yi Ym is tantamount to your not wishing me 
to do good.” As a result, he dismissed the son of the Peng 
family and did not allow him to drive the chariot. If your 
king were [like Tang], then he would be able [to accept the 
advice of a lowly person].’ 

47.4 Master Mo said: ‘Any words or deeds that are 
beneficial to Heaven, ghosts or ordinary people should be 
put into effect. Any words or deeds that are harmful to 
Heaven, ghosts or ordinary people should be set aside. Any 
words or deeds that are in line with the sage kings of the 
Three Dynasties - Yao, Shun, Yu, Tang, Wen and Wu - 
should be put into effect. Any words or deeds that are in 
line with the tyrannical kings of the Three Dynasties - Jie, 
Zhou, You and Li - should be set aside.’ 

47.5 Master Mo said: ‘Words that are sufficient to change 
conduct (for the better) should be spoken frequently. 

Words that are not sufficient to change conduct (for the 
better) should not be spoken frequently. If words that are 
not sufficient to change conduct (for the better) are spoken 
frequently, it is a waste of breath.’ 

47.6 Master Mo said: ‘When silent, think; when speaking, 
instruct; when acting, devote yourself to affairs. Use these 



three [maxims] repeatedly and you will certainly become a 
sage. You must do away with the six partialities. [That is,] 
you must do away with pleasure, anger, joy, sorrow, love 
and hate and make use of ren (love, kindness, humaneness 
and benevolence) and yi. When your hands, feet, mouth, 
nose, ears and [eyes] are entirely devoted to yi, you will 
certainly become a sage.’ 

47.7 Master Mo spoke to two or three disciples, saying: 
‘Even if you are not able to achieve yi, you must not 
abandon this Way, just as the carpenter who is unable to cut 
[straight] does not abandon his line.’ 

47.8 Master Mo said: ‘If you ask the noble men of the age 
to butcher a dog or pig and they can’t do it, they decline the 
task. If you ask them to be ministers of a state, although 
they don’t have the ability, they do it. Is this not perverse?’ 

47.9 Master Mo said: ‘Now someone who is blind says, 
“What is light is white; what is dark is black.” Even those 
who are keen-sighted can’t take exception to this. But if 
you mix white and black objects together and ask a blind 
person to choose, he can’t tell which is which. Therefore, 
when I say that the blind person doesn’t know white and 
black, this doesn’t refer to their naming, but to their 
choosing. Now the way the noble men of the world use the 



term ren, even Yu and Tang could not take exception to. But 
if you mix the ren and the not ren together and ask the 
noble men of the world to choose, they don’t know one 
from the other. Therefore, when I say that the noble men of 
the world don’t know ren, this does not refer to their 
naming; this too refers to their choosing.’ 

47.10 Master Mo said: ‘Nowadays, officers are not prudent 
in using themselves the way merchants are prudent in using 
money. When a merchant spends money on buying 
something, he dare not be careless in his purchasing. He 
certainly chooses what is good. Now officers are not like 
this in using themselves. If they think of something they 
wish to do, they do it. In severe cases they suffer penalties 
and punishment; in minor cases they are criticized and 
reviled. So officers are not prudent in using themselves the 
way merchants are prudent in using money.’ 

47.11 Master Mo said: ‘Noble men of the age wish their yi 
to be complete, but if you help them cultivate themselves, 
they become indignant. This is like wishing to complete a 
wall, but becoming indignant if someone helps you build it. 
Is this not perverse?’ 

47.12 Master Mo said: ‘The sage kings of ancient times 
wished to hand down their Way to later generations. For 



this reason, they recorded it on bamboo and silk and carved 
it on metal and stone to hand it down to later generations, 
wishing these descendants to use it as a model. Now we 
hear of the Way of former kings, and yet we don’t put it 
into practice. This is to discard what the former kings have 
handed down.’ 

47.13 When Master Mo was travelling south to serve in 
Wei, he carried many books in his wagon. Xian Tangzi was 
surprised to see this and said: ‘You, sir, have taught 
Gongshang Guo, saying, “Evaluate the crooked and straight 
and that is all.” 2 Now you carry many books. Why is this?’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘In ancient times, Dan, the Duke of 
Zhou, read a hundred pian of books in the morning and 
received seventy officers in the evening. This is why the 
Duke of Zhou, Dan’s assistance to the Son of Heaven and 
his cultivation are still talked about today. Above, I have no 
prince to serve; below, I have no ploughing or farming to 
contend with. How do I dare to set these [books] aside? I 
have heard this: “Principles may have the one path, but it is 
difficult to avoid errors on the way.” 3 This being so, what 
the people hear is not uniform. That is wiry I have so many 
books. Now if you go over things in your mind and 
consider them in fine detail, you will understand that the 
essential elements of the principles form a single path. 


When this is finally understood, you don’t need books to 
teach you. Why do you find this so strange?’ 

47.14 Master Mo spoke to Gongliang Huanzi, 4 saying: 

‘Wei is a small country situated between Qi and Jin. It is 
like a poor household situated between rich households. If 
a household is poor and yet imitates a rich household’s 
excessive use of clothes and food, then its quick 
destruction is certain. Now, when I look at your household, 
there are several hundred decorated carriages, several 
hundred fine grain-fed horses and several hundred women 
with elegant and embroidered clothes. If I were to use the 
money wasted on decorated carriages and fine horses, and 
that spent on embroidered clothes, to gather knights errant, 
I would certainly have a thousand men or more. If there is a 
calamitous situation, which is more secure: to position a 
hundred men at the front and several hundred men at the 
rear, or to position several hundred women front and rear? I 
think the latter would not compare in terms of security to 
the collected knights errant.’ 

47.15 Master Mo recommended someone for office in 
Wei. Tire man he recommended went and returned. Master 
Mo asked him why he had returned. 


Hie man replied: ‘Hie prince did not make good his 
promise to me. He said he would give me a thousand 
measures of grain, but I received only five hundred. Hiat is 
why I left.’ 

Master Mo asked: ‘If he had given you more than a 
thousand measures of grain, would you have left?’ 

Hie man replied: ‘No, I would not.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘In that case, it was not his failure to 
keep his word. It was his parsimony.’ 

47.16 Master Mo said: ‘It is characteristic of the age that 
the noble man does not look on a yi officer as he does on a 
grain carrier. Now suppose there was a man here, a grain 
carrier, resting at the side of the road, who wanted to get up 
but couldn’t, and a noble man saw him. Hie noble man 
would certainly help him get up whether he was old or 
young, rich or poor. Why is this? I say it is because he is yi. 
Nowadays, if a noble man in being yi carries on the Way of 
former kings and speaks about it, not only are others 
unhappy to put it into practice; they even criticize it. Hiis, 
then, is what I mean by saying it is characteristic of the age 
that a noble man does not look on a right-acting (yi ) officer 
like he does on a grain carrier.’ 



47.17 Master Mo said: ‘Merchants travel in all directions 
looking to make a two- or fivefold profit in their trading. 5 
Even if there are the difficulties of barriers and bridges, 
and the dangers of thieves and robbers, they must do this. 
Nowadays, officers sit and discuss yi. They have no 
difficulties with barriers and bridges, and no danger from 
thieves and robbers. In this, the benefit would not only be 
two- or fivefold; it would be beyond calculation. 
Nevertheless, they do not practise it (i.e. yi). Thus officers 
in calculating what is profitable don’t see as clearly as 
merchants.’ 

47.18 When Master Mo was travelling north to Qi, he met 
a soothsayer who said: ‘On this day the Supreme Being 
kills the black dragon in the Northern Region so, since you, 
sir, have a dark countenance, you may not go north.’ Master 
Mo did not listen. He continued north but when he reached 
the Zi Waters, 6 he ran into difficulty and returned. The 
soothsayer said: ‘I told you, sir, that you couldn’t go north.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘People to the north can’t reach the 
south and people to the south can’t reach the north. In 
terms of complexion, there are some who are dark and 
some who are fair. Why is it that they all cannot proceed? 
Moreover, on the days of jia and yi the Supreme Being kills 
the green dragon in the Eastern Region, on the days of bing 


and ding he kills the red dragon in the Southern Region, on 
the days of geng and xin he kills the white dragon in the 
Western Region, on the days of ren and gui he kills the 
black dragon in the Northern Region [and on the days of wu 
and ji he kills the yellow dragon in the Central Region], If 
we use your words, sir, then this prohibits all travel in the 
world. This runs counter to people’s minds and “empties” 
the world, so your words cannot be used.’ 

47.19 Master Mo said: ‘My words are sufficient for your 
use. Someone who casts aside my words and changes my 
ideas is like a person who casts aside the harvest and just 
picks up grains. To use your own words to negate my words 
is like throwing eggs against a rock. Even if you use all the 
eggs in the world, the rock remains as it was and cannot be 
destroyed.’ 


48 


Gongmeng 


48.1 Gongmeng Zi 1 spoke to Master Mo saying: ‘A noble 
man folds Iris hands and waits. If he is questioned, he 
speaks. If he is not questioned, he desists. He is like a bell. 
If a bell is struck, it sounds; if it isn’t struck, it doesn’t 
sound.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘To this, I say there are three 
circumstances. 2 Now, sir, you only know of one, so you 
don’t yet know what is being said. If a great officer behaves 
in a dissolute and cruel way in the state, to come forward to 
remonstrate with him is called not being humble. To 
remonstrate through those around him is called privately 
criticizing. For the noble man this is a perplexing matter. 
Now if the great officer who is governing is about to 
encounter some difficulty in the state, the noble man must 
come forward, like an arrow that flies from a bow, to 
remonstrate and so be of benefit to the great officer. In this 


case, even if he is not struck, he must sound. Suppose a 
great officer undertakes some unusual enterprise that is not 
yi (right andjust). For example, suppose he acquires some 
ingenious device which can be used in warfare and wishes 
to attack some unoffending state with it. If he has acquired 
it, he will certainly use it to extend his territory and land, 
and illegally extort goods and wealth, hr going forth, 
however, there is unquestionably disgrace; nor is there 
benefit either to the one attacked or to the one attacking - 
that is, neither benefits. In such a case, although not struck, 
he should certainly sound. Moreover, you say, “Anoble man 
will fold his hands and wait. If he is asked, he speaks; if he 
is not asked, he desists. He is like a bell. If a bell is struck, 
it sounds; if it isn’t struck, it doesn’t sound.” Now you have 
not been struck and yet you speak. Isn’t this what you call 
sounding without being struck? Isn’t this what you call not 
being a noble man?’ 

48.2 Gongmeng Zi spoke to Master Mo, saying: ‘Is there a 
person who is truly good, but is not known? Like, for 
example, a prognosticator who stays at home and doesn’t 
go out, but has an abundance of grain. Like, for example, a 
beautiful maiden who stays at home and doesn’t go out, but 
has men contending to get her. If, however, she does go out 
and display herself, men will not seek her. Now you go 



about everywhere offering your theories. Why take the 
trouble?’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘It is now a time of disorder. Those 
who seek beautiful maidens are many, so even if a beautiful 
maiden doesn’t go out, there are still many who seek her. 
But those who seek goodness are few. If there are not men 
who take the trouble to go about exhorting them, people 
will not know about it. Moreover, suppose there are two 
people, both of whom are good at prognostication, but one 
goes out and prognosticates for people while the other 
stays at home and doesn’t go out. Which of the two will 
have more grain - the one who goes out and prognosticates 
for people or the one who stays at home and doesn’t go 
out?’ 

Gongmeng Zi answered: ‘Tire one who goes about 
prognosticating for people will have more grain.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘It is the same with ren (love, kindness, 
humaneness and benevolence) and yi (right action, 
righteousness and justice). Tire one who travels about 
speaking to people will also have much greater merit. So 
why not go about speaking to people?’ 

48.3 Gongmeng Zi, having donned his ceremonial cap, 
stuck the official tablet into his girdle, put on his scholar’s 
robes and went to see Master Mo. He asked: ‘Does a noble 



man attire himself and afterwards act or does he act and 
afterwards attire himself?’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘Actions have nothing to do with 
attire.’ 

Gongmeng Zi asked: ‘How do you know this to be so?’ 

Master Mo answered: ‘In the past, Duke Huan of Qi, 
wearing a high cap and broad girdle, and carrying a gold 
sword and wooden shield, brought order to his state and his 
state was well governed. In the past, Duke Wen of Jin, 
wearing clothes of coarse cloth and a sheepskin cloak, and 
carrying a sword in a leather belt, brought order to his state 
and Iris state was well governed. In the past, King Zhuang of 
Chu, wearing a brightly coloured cap with silk ribbons 
attached and a large robe, brought order to his state and his 
state was well governed. Formerly, the Yue king Gou Jian, 3 
having cut his hair short and decorated his body, brought 
order to his state and his state was well governed. In the 
case of these four rulers, although they were different in 
attire, they were as one in actions. Tlris is how I know that 
actions have nothing to do with attire.’ 

Gongmeng Zi said: ‘Ah, goodness! I have heard it said 
that the one who ceases from goodness is not fortunate. 
May I ask if it is possible to put aside the official tablet, 
change the ceremonial cap and visit you again?’ 


Master Mo answered: ‘Tbu ask how we should meet. If 
you must put aside the official tablet, change the 
ceremonial cap and afterwards meet, this is then action 
being dependent on attire.’ 

48.4 Gongmeng Zi said: ‘Anoble man must be ancient in 
speech and attire, and afterwards he is ren. ’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘In former times, the Shang king, 
Zhou, and Chief Minister Fei Zhong were tyrants of the 
world. On the other hand, Viscount Ji and Viscount Wei 4 
were sages of the world. This is a case of having the same 
speech, but some being ren and some not being ren. Dan, 
the Duke of Zhou, was a sage of the world, [whereas] Guan 
Shu'' was a tyrant of the world. This is a case of having the 
same attire, but one being ren and one not being ren. This 
being so, ren does not lie in ancient attire and ancient 
words. Moreover, you take Zhou and not Xia 6 as the model, 
so your “ancient” is not really ancient.’ 

48.5 Gongmeng Zi spoke to Master Mo, saying: ‘In former 
times, when the sage kings established rank, they gave the 
highest sage the position of Son of Heaven, and the sages 
next in order got positions as ministers and great officials. 
Now Confucius had a wide knowledge of the Odes and the 
Documents. He had looked carefully into rites and music, 7 


and had a clear understanding of the ten thousand things. If 
Confucius was truly a sage king, then how was he not made 
the Son of Heaven?’ 

Master Mo said: ‘In the case of the wise man, he must 
certainly honour Heaven and serve ghosts, love people and 
show moderation in use. His wisdom lies in combining 
these things. Now you say, Confucius had a wide knowledge 
of the Odes and the Documents, had looked carefully into 
rites and music and had a clear understanding of the ten 
thousand things, and that he could be taken to be the Son of 
Heaven. This is like counting a person’s “teeth” 8 to 
determine his wealth.’ 

Gongmeng Zi said: ‘Poverty and wealth, longevity and 
early death, truly lie with Heaven, and cannot be decreased 
or increased.’ He also said: ‘Anoble man must study.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘To teach a person to study and yet to 
claim there is Fate is like telling him to bind up his hair, but 
do away with his cap.’ 

48.6 Gongmeng Zi spoke to Master Mo, saying: ‘There is 
being yi and there is being not yi. There is not good fortune 
and bad fortune.’ 9 

Master Mo said: ‘The ancient sage kings all considered 
ghosts and spirits to be divine and all-seeing, to be able to 
dispense calamity and blessing and to have control of good 


fortune and bad fortune. This was how they brought order to 
government and peace to the country. From Jie and Zhou 
onwards, all considered ghosts and spirits not to be divine 
and all-seeing, not to be able to dispense calamity and 
blessing and not to have control of good fortune and bad 
fortune. This was how they brought disorder to government 
and danger to the country. Therefore, in the historical 
writings of the former kings, the Ziyi 10 has this to say: “If 
you display pride you will not have good fortune.” This is 
to say that when something is done that is bad, there will be 
punishment, and when something is done that is good, there 
will be reward.’ 

48.7 Master Mo spoke to Gongmeng Zi, saying: ‘With 
regard to mourning rites, when the ruler, father or mother, 
wife, or eldest son dies, there is mourning for three years. 
In the case of a father’s older or younger brothers, or 
[one’s own] older or younger brothers, the period is one 
year. For members of one’s clan, it is five months. For 
paternal aunts, older sisters, maternal uncles and a sister’s 
children, in all cases there are several months of mourning. 
Some use the period during mourning to recite the three 
hundred odes, 11 to play the three hundred odes on stringed 
instruments, to sing the three hundred odes or to dance the 
three hundred odes. If your words are used, then how can 


the noble man attend to the day-to-day business of 
government? How can the ordinary people attend to their 
day-to-day affairs?’ 

48.8 Gongmeng Zi said: ‘If a state is in disorder, it should 
be brought to order. If a state is well ordered, rites and 
music should be practised. If a state is poor, affairs should 
be attended to. If a state is rich, rites and music should be 
practised.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘If a state is well ordered, there is 
attention to order and so it is well ordered. If attention to 
order is done away with, then the order of a state is also 
done away with. If a state is rich, there has been attention to 
affairs - this is why it is rich. If attention to affairs is done 
away with, then a state’s wealth is also done away with. 
Hierefore, although a state is well ordered, it is unceasing 
diligence that makes this possible. Now you say, “If a state 
is well ordered, then practise rites and music; if it is in 
disorder, then bring it to order.” This is like saying that, if 
someone is parched, he should dig a well, or if someone 
has died, a doctor should be sought. In ancient times, the 
tyrannical rulers of the Three Dynasties - Jie, Zhou, You 
and Li - took delight in music and did not look to their 
people. This is why they themselves were punished and 
killed, and why, in the state, there were no descendants and 




the houses were empty. 12 In all instances, it was a result of 
following this path.’ 

48.9 Gongmeng Zi said: ‘There are no ghosts and spirits.’ 
He also said: ‘Anoble man must study sacrifices and 
rituals.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘To hold that there are no ghosts, and 
yet to study sacrifices and rituals is like having no guests, 
but studying the ceremonies for guests. It is like there 
being no fish, but making a fishnet.’ 

48.10 Gongmeng Zi spoke to Master Mo, saying: ‘Yru 
consider three years of mourning to be wrong. Your three 
months of mourning is also wrong.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘You accept three years of mourning, 
but you condemn three months 13 of mourning. This is like 
someone who has stripped naked saying a person who has 
just lifted his garments is indecent.’ 

48.11 Gongmeng Zi spoke to Master Mo, asking: ‘If one 
man’s knowledge surpasses that of another man, can he then 
be said to be knowledgeable?’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘Afool’s knowledge may surpass 
that of another man, but how can a fool be deemed 
knowledgeable?’ 


48.12 Gongmeng Zi said: ‘Three years of mourning teaches 
me of a child’s affection for its parents.’ 14 

Master Mo said: ‘A baby boy’s knowledge is such that he 
just loves his father and mother and that is all. If he cannot 
have his father and mother, he will cry and not stop. What is 
the reason for this? It is because his foolishness is 
extreme. If this is so, then how is the knowledge of a 
Confucian greater than that of a baby boy?’ 

48.13 Master Mo questioned a Confucian, asking him: 
‘Why make music?’ 

[Tire Confucian] replied: ‘Music is made for its own 
sake.’ 15 

Master Mo said: ‘You have not yet answered my 
question. If I ask you, “Why make a house?” and you say, 

‘To keep out the cold in winter and the heat in summer, and 
also to maintain a separation between men and women”, 
this is telling me what a house is for. Now when I ask you, 
“Why make music?”, you say, ‘Music is for its own sake.” 
This is like saying, when I ask, “Why make a house”, that “A 
house is made for its own sake.” ’ 

48.14 Master Mo spoke to Cheng Zi, 16 saying: ‘The way of 
Confucianism has four principles which are enough to 
destroy all under Heaven. Confucians take Heaven not to be 


all-seeing and ghosts not to be divine. Thus they arouse 
displeasure in Heaven and ghosts. This is enough to destroy 
all under Heaven. Urey also have elaborate funerals and 
prolonged mourning, give importance to the making of 
inner and outer coffins, prepare many burial garments and 
have funeral processions which are like moving to another 
house. Crying and weeping go on for three years. Urey need 
help to stand up and a staff to walk. Their ears cannot hear 
and their eyes cannot see. This is enough to destroy all 
under Heaven. Urey also have stringed instruments and 
songs, drums and dances, and they indulge in singing and 
music. This is enough to destroy all under Heaven. Urey 
also consider there to be Fate, such that poverty and riches, 
longevity and dying young, order and disorder, and safety 
and danger are predetermined and cannot be reduced or 
increased. If those above practise this, they will certainly 
not attend to government. If those below practise this, they 
will certainly not carry out their business. This is enough to 
destroy all under Heaven.’ 

Cheng Zi said: ‘It is too much, your slander of the 
Confucians.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘If the Confucians do not have these 
four principles, but I say they do, then this is slander. Now 
the Confucians certainly do have these four principles, so 
my saying so is not slander - it is informing the listener.’ 



Cheng Zi had no answer and went out. 

Master Mo called: ‘Come back’, whereupon Cheng Zi 
returned and sat down again. 

Cheng Zi then continued, saying: ‘What you, sir, have 
just said is open to criticism, for according to your 
statements, there should be no praise for Yu and no blame 
for Jie and Zhou.’ 17 

Master Mo said: ‘Not so. In responding to ordinary 
statements, there is no need for complex debate, thinking it 
clever. If there is a substantial attack, there should be a 
substantial defence. If there is a slight attack, there should 
be a slight defence. To respond to ordinary statements with 
elaborate debate is like using a cart-shaft to strike an ant.’ 

48.15 Master Mo and Cheng Zi were debating the issue of 
praise for Confucius. Cheng Zi asked: ‘Ybu are not a 
Confucian, so why do you praise Confucius?’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘Because there is what is right and 
this cannot be changed. Now when a bird becomes aware of 
the problems of heat and drought, it certainly flies high. 
When a fish becomes aware of the problems of heat and 
drought, it certainly dives deep. The appropriateness of this 
is something even the stratagems of Yu and Tang certainly 
cannot change. Birds and fish may be said to be 
unintelligent, yet Yu and Tang would, in some instances, 


still follow them. Now why should I never praise 
Confucius?’ 

48.16 There was a man who travelled to Master Mo’s 
school. He was strong in body and sharp in mind, and the 
Master wanted him to stay and study. 

Master Mo said: ‘If you study for a while, I shall make 
you an official.’ 

The man was persuaded by these fine words and became 
a student. After a full year had passed, he demanded an 
official position from Master Mo. 

Master Mo said: ‘I haven’t got you an official position. 
But have you not heard the story of the men of Lu? In Lu, 
there were five brothers. Hreir father died, but the older 
brother loved wine and would not attend to the funeral. His 
four younger brothers told him that if he carried out the 
funeral for them, they would definitely buy him wine. He 
was persuaded by these fine words and carried out the 
funeral. After the funeral, he demanded wine from his four 
younger brothers. But the four younger brothers said to 
him: “We will not give you wine. You buried your father and 
we buried our father. Was he only our father? If you had not 
buried him, people would have laughed at you. Therefore, 
we persuaded you to bury him.” Now you are yi and I am 
also yi. Am I the only one who is yi? If you had not studied, 



people would have laughed at you. That is why I persuaded 
you to study.’ 

48.17 There was a man who travelled to Master Mo’s 
school. 

Master Mo asked: ‘Why don’t you study?’ 

Tire man replied: ‘My clansmen don’t study.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘That doesn’t matter. Does someone 
who loves beauty say, ‘My clansmen don’t love beauty so I 
won’t love beauty”? Does someone who desires wealth and 
riches say, ‘My clansmen don’t desire wealth and riches so 
I won’t desire wealth and riches”? Those who love beauty 
and those who desire wealth and riches don’t take into 
account the views of others, and yet they are still strong in 
doing these things. Nowy/ is the “great instrument” of the 
world. Why must one look to the views of others to be 
strong in practising it?’ 

48.18 There was a man who travelled to Master Mo’s 
school and spoke to Master Mo, saying: ‘You, sir, consider 
ghosts and spirits to be all-seeing and all-knowing, and able 
to bring about bad fortune and good fortune. If someone is 
good, they bring him good fortune; if someone is bad, they 
bring him bad fortune. Now I have served you for a long 
time but good fortune has not come. Does this mean that 



your words are not right, that ghosts and spirits are not all- 
seeing? Why is it that I have not found good fortune?’ 

Master Mo said: ‘Although you have not found good 
fortune, how does that make my words wrong, or ghosts 
and spirits not all-seeing? Haven’t you also heard that 
hiding a criminal is still a crime?’ 

The man replied: ‘I have never heard that.’ 

48.19 Master Mo said: ‘Suppose there is this man who is 
ten times greater than you. 18 Are you able to praise him ten 
times, but yourself only once?’ 

He replied: ‘I am unable to.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘Suppose there is this man who is a 
hundred times greater than you. Are you able, through your 
whole life, to praise his goodness, but not praise yourself 
even once?’ 

He replied: ‘I am unable to.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘To conceal one person is still a fault. 
Now what you conceal is much more than this, so there will 
be a much greater fault. How is it you seek good fortune?’ 

48.20 Master Mo was sick. Die Bi 19 approached and 
questioned him, saying: ‘Sir, you take ghosts and spirits to 
be all-seeing, to be able to bring about bad fortune and 
good fortune, to reward those who do good and punish 


those who do bad. Now you, sir, are a sage, so how is it you 
are sick? Does it mean that there is that in your words that 
is not good, or that ghosts and spirits do not see and know 
[all]?’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘Although I am caused to be sick, 
how does this mean that my words are all of a sudden not 
good, or that ghosts and spirits are all of a sudden not all- 
seeing? There are many ways in which people can become 
sick. They can suffer from cold or heat. They can suffer 
from strain or fatigue. If there are a hundred gates and only 
one is shut, then how, all of a sudden, can a robber not 
enter?’ 

48.21 Several disciples told Master Mo they were studying 
archery. 

Master Mo said: ‘It is not possible. Those who are wise 
certainly measure their strength in terms of what they are 
able to do, and act accordingly. Even officers of the state 
cannot both fight people and help them. You are not yet 
officers of the state, so how can you become both scholars 
and archers?’ 

48.22 Several disciples informed Master Mo as follows: 
‘Gao Zi 20 has said that your talk is of yi, but your conduct is 
very evil. We ask you to cast him off.’ 


Master Mo said: ‘Impossible. If he praises my words in 
the course of criticizing my conduct, it is better than 
nothing. Suppose there is a person [who says] that I am to 
an extreme degree not ren, but that I revere Heaven, serve 
ghosts and love people. Although he says I am to an 
extreme degree not ren, it is still better than nothing. Now 
Gao Zi’s discourse is very eloquent when he speaks of ren 
and yi, but not when he slanders me. So Gao Zi’s slander is 
better than nothing.’ 

48.23 Several disciples informed Master Mo, saying: ‘Gao 
Zi is very diligent about being ren.' 

Master Mo said: ‘That is not necessarily the case. Gao 
Zi’s being ren is like someone standing on tiptoes to be 
tall, or spreading himself out to be broad. It can’t last long.’ 

48.24 Gao Zi spoke to Master Mo, saying: ‘I am able to 
bring order to the state in the conduct of government.’ 

Master Mo responded: ‘In the case of one who governs, 
what his mouth says, he himself must do. Now what your 
mouth says, you yourself do not do. Hris represents 
disorder in yourself. Tbu are not able to bring order to 
yourself, so how can you bring order to the state in 
governing? You had best not say anything for the moment. 



While you yourself are in disorder, you won’t be able to do 
what you say.’ 



49 


Lu’s Questions 
(Lu Wen) 


49.1 Hie ruler of Lu 1 spoke to Master Mo, saying: ‘I fear 
that Qi will attack me. Can I be saved?’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘You can be. In former times, the 
sage kings of the Three Dynasties - Yu, Tang, Wen and Wu 
- were feudal lords over small (one hundred //) states, but 
because they loved loyalty and practised yi (right action, 
righteousness and justice), they gained all under Heaven. 
The tyrannical kings of the Three Dynasties - Jie, Zhou, 
You and Li - because they were inimical to loyalty and 
acted cruelly, lost all under Heaven. I would wish your 
lordship to respect Heaven and the affairs of ghosts above, 
and to love and bring benefit to the ordinary people below, 
to be generous with skins and silk (i.e. gifts), to be humble 
in issuing commands, to give urgent attention to 


ceremonial matters involving the feudal lords on all sides 
and to urge the state to serve Qi. Then disaster can be 
averted. Apart from this, there is assuredly nothing you can 
do.’ 

49.2 Qi was about to attack Lu. Master Mo spoke to Xiang 
Ziniu, 2 saying: ‘To attack Lu would be a great mistake for 
Qi. In former times, the King of Wu attacked 'Yue to the 
east [and his army] ran into difficulties at Guiji. To the 
west, he attacked Chu. Under concealment, Zhao Wang fled 
to Sui. To the north, he attacked Qi and, having seized Guo 
Zi, returned to Wu. The feudal lords took revenge on their 
enemy and the ordinary people met with suffering and 
hardship, and could not be of use. This is why the state 
suffered depredation and he himself was punished and 
killed. 3 In former times, Zhi Bo attacked the houses of Fan 
and Zhonghang and combined the lands of the San Jin. 4 Tire 
feudal lords took revenge on their enemy and the ordinary 
people met with suffering and hardship, and could not be of 
use. This is why the state suffered depredation and he 
himself was punished and killed. So in the case of a large 
state attacking a small state, both will suffer injury and the 
fault will certainly redound to the (perpetrating) state.’ 


49.3 Master Mo saw the great King of Qi 5 and said: ‘Now 
suppose there was this sword which, when you tried it on a 
man’s head, swiftly cut it off. Could it be called sharp?’ 

The great King replied: ‘It would be sharp.’ 

Master Mo asked: ‘If you tried it on many men’s heads 
and it swiftly cut them off, could it be called sharp?’ 

The great King replied: ‘It would be sharp.’ 

Master Mo asked: ‘If the sword is sharp, who is it that 
will receive its bad fortune?’ 

The great King replied: ‘The sword receives its 
sharpness. Hie one who tries it receives its bad fortune. 

Master Mo asked: ‘If you annex states and overthrow 
armies, if you plunder and kill the common people, who 
will receive the bad fortune of this?’ 

The great King looked up and down and pondered the 
matter before replying: ‘I will receive the bad fortune of 
this.’ 

49.4 Prince Wen of Luyang 6 was about to attack Zheng 
when Master Mo heard about it and stopped him, saying to 
the Prince: ‘Now suppose that within the lour borders of 
Lu the large cities attacked the small cities and the great 
families attacked the small families, killing the people and 
taking their oxen, horses, dogs, pigs, cloth, silk, rice, 
millet, goods and valuables - what would happen then?’ 


Prince Wen of Luyang replied: ‘All within the four 
boundaries of Lu are my subjects. Now if the large cities 
attack the small cities and the great families attack the 
small families, seizing their goods and valuables, I will 
certainly punish them severely.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘Heaven possesses all that is beneath it, 
just as you possess all that is within the four boundaries of 
your state. Now if you raise an army with the intention of 
attacking Zheng, will Heaven not visit its punishment on 
you?’ 

Prince Wen of Luyang asked: ‘Why do you stop me from 
attacking Zheng? In attacking Zheng I am merely complying 
with Heaven’s intention. For three generations the people 
of Zheng have killed their prince and Heaven has 
intensified its punishment, so for three years they have not 
prospered. I shall be helping Heaven punish them.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘For three generations the people of 
Zheng have killed their prince and Heaven has intensified 
its punishment, causing them not to prosper for three years. 
Heaven’s punishment is sufficient. Now you raise an army 
as well, intending to attack Zheng. Yo u say: ‘My attacking 
Zheng is merely complying with Heaven’s intention.” This 
is like there being a man whose son is violent and worthless 
so he beats him, and then his neighbour’s father takes up a 
cudgel and also beats him, saying that his beating him is 



merely complying with his father’s intention. How is this 
not perverse?’ 

49.5 Master Mo spoke to Prince Wen of Luyang, saying: 
‘Suppose [a prince] attacked his neighbouring states, killed 
their people, took their oxen and horses, rice and millet, 
goods and valuables, and then recorded it on bamboo and 
silk, engraved it on metal and stone and thought to carve it 
on bells and tripods {ding) to transmit it to his sons and 
grandsons of later generations, saying, “Nobody has as 
much as I have.” Then the ignoble man will also attack his 
neighbouring houses, killing their people, taking their dogs 
and pigs, food and grain, clothes and furs, also recording it 
on bamboo and silk, and carving it into tables and bowls in 
order to hand it down to his sons and grandsons of later 
generations, saying, “Nobody has as much as I have.” Is this 
permissible?’ 

Prince Wen of Luyang replied: ‘Indeed, when I look at 
things in the light of your words, what the world speaks of 
as permissible is certainly not so.’ 

49.6 Master Mo spoke to Prince Wen of Luyang, saying: 
‘Noble men of the world all know about small things, but 
not about great things. Now suppose a man were to steal a 
dog or a pig, they would say he was not ren, whereas, if he 



were to steal a state or a city, they would take him to be yi 
(right action, righteousness andjustice). This is like seeing 
a small expanse of white and calling it white, but seeing a 
great expanse of white and calling it black. This is why I 
said what I said - noble men of the world know about small 
things, but not about great things.’ 

49.7 Prince Wen of Luyang spoke to Master Mo, saying: 

‘To the south of Chu there is the country Qiao, in which 
cannibalism occurs. 7 In that country, when the first son is 
born, he is eaten alive. This is said to be a protection for 
younger brothers. If he tastes good, then he is offered to 
the prince, and if the prince is pleased, he rewards the 
father. How is this not an evil custom?’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘Even in the customs of the central 
states there is also something like this, for how is killing 
the father and rewarding the son different from eating the 
son and rewarding the father? If ren and yi are not 
practised, how can there be censure of barbarians for eating 
their sons?’ 

49.8 When the Prince of Lu’s favourite concubine died, a 
man from Lu wrote a eulogy for her. Because the Prince of 
Lu was pleased, he employed the man. Master Mo heard 
about this and said: ‘Aeulogy is for speaking favourably of 


the intentions of the dead person. Now because [the prince] 
is pleased, to employ the man is like making a fox the 
leader of a team of horses.’ 

49.9 Prince Wen of Luyang spoke to Master Mo, saying: 
‘Suppose someone told me of a loyal official who if 
ordered to bow down, bowed down, and if ordered to look 
up, looked up; who was quiet when at rest, but responded 
when called. Could he be called a loyal official?’ 

Master Mo said: ‘If you order him to bow down and he 
bows down, and if you order him to look up and he looks 
up, he is like a shadow. If at rest he is quiet, but if called he 
responds, he is like an echo. What can a prince get from a 
shadow or an echo? What I have to say about a loyal 
minister is this. If the ruler is at fault, he should await the 
appropriate time and censure him. If he himself has 
something of value, he should discuss it with the ruler, but 
not with others generally. He should correct any 
heterodoxy and follow the path of goodness. He should 
make himself like the ruler and not follow subordinates. In 
this way, beauty and goodness will lie with the ruler, and 
resentment and enmity will lie with those below. Peace and 
happiness will lie with the one above, and grief and sorrow 
will lie with the officials. Hris is what I call a loyal 
official.’ 



49.10 Hie Prince of Lu spoke to Master Mo, saying: ‘I 
have two sons. One loves learning and the other loves 
dividing wealth among people. Which one should I make 
my successor?’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘It is impossible to know. It may be 
that they do what they do for reward and praise. Hie 
fisherman’s bait is not a gift to the fish. Luring a mouse 
with bait is not done through love of the mouse. I wish the 
prince to take into account both their intention and their 
achievement and look at the matter.’ 

49.11 Hiere was a man from Lu who sent his son to study 
with Master Mo. When his son died in battle, the father was 
angry with Master Mo. 

Master Mo said: ‘You wanted your son to study with me. 
Now, his studies being complete, he fought in a battle and 
died, and you are angry with me. Hiis is like wanting to sell 
grain but being angry when it is sold. How is this not 
perverse?’ 

49.12 Hiere was a rustic who lived in the south of Lu, a 
certain Wu Lu. Making pottery in the winter and farming in 
the summer, he compared himself to Shun. Master Mo 
heard about this and went to see him. 



Wu Lii said to Master Mo: ‘Ah yi (right action), yz! What 
is the use of talking about it?’ 

Master Mo asked: ‘Is what you call yi also having the 
strength to help people and the resources to divide among 
people?’ 

Wu Lii answered: ‘It is.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘I have already thought about this. I 
considered taking up farming to feed the people of the 
world, but at the most I would only achieve the output of 
one farmer. If this were to be divided in the world, each 
person would not be able to get even 1 sheng of grain. It 
can be readily seen that even if they were to get 1 sheng of 
grain, this would not be able to satisfy those in the world 
who were hungry. I considered taking up weaving to make 
clothes for the people of the world, but at the most I would 
only achieve the output of one weaving woman. If this were 
to be divided in the world, each person would not be able to 
get even 1 chi of cloth. It can readily be seen that this 
would not be able to bring warmth to those in the world 
who were cold. I considered taking up shield and sword to 
save the feudal lords from calamity, but at the most I would 
only have the effect of a single soldier. It can readily be 
seen that a single soldier cannot resist the “three armies”. I 
think there is nothing that equals understanding the Way of 
former kings and seeking out what they said, and 



understanding the words of the sages and examining their 
statements. There is nothing that equals spreading these 
words among kings, dukes and great officers above, and 
next among the ordinary people. If kings, dukes and great 
officers make use of my words, states will certainly be 
well ordered. If the ordinary people make use of my words, 
conduct will certainly be regulated. Therefore I think that 
although I don’t plough and provide food for the hungry, 
although I don’t weave and provide clothes for the cold, 
nevertheless, my achievement is more worthy than that of 
those who do plough and provide food and those who do 
weave and provide clothes. That is, I think that although I do 
not plough and weave, nevertheless, my achievement is 
more worthy than if I did plough and weave.’ 

Wu Lii spoke to Master Mo, saying: ‘Ah yi,yi\ What is 
the use of talking about it?’ 

Master Mo asked: ‘Suppose there was no knowledge of 
ploughing in the world. Whose merit would be greater - 
someone who teaches people to plough or someone who 
does not teach people to plough, but only ploughs himself?’ 

Wu Lii replied: ‘Someone who teaches people to plough 
would have the greater merit.’ 

Master Mo asked: ‘Suppose there was an attack on a 
state which was not yi. Whose merit would be greater - 
someone who beats the drum and causes the multitude to 



go into battle or someone who does not beat the drum and 
cause the multitude to go into battle, but only goes into 
battle himself?’ 

Wu Lii replied: ‘Someone who beats the drum and brings 
about the advance would have the greater merit.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘Among the ordinary people and foot 
soldiers of the world, there are few who knowjd, so the 
one who teaches the world yi would also have great merit. 
What reason is there not to speak about it? If I were to take 
a drum and beat it to advance yi, then how is my yi not 
further advanced?’ 

49.13 Master Mo recommended Gongshang Guo s to Yue. 
Gongshang Guo addressed the Yiie king, who was greatly 
pleased and spoke to Gongshang Guo, saying: ‘If you can 
get Master Mo to come to Yue and teach me, I shall divide 
off a part of what was formerly Wu, to the extent of five 
hundred li square, and enfeoff him with it.’ 

Gongshang Guo agreed. Subsequently, he took fifty 
wagons to Lu to receive Master Mo and said: ‘When I 
spoke to the Yiie king about your Way, he was extremely 
pleased and told me that if I was able to bring you to Yiie to 
teach him, he would divide off a part of what was formerly 
Wu, to the extent of five hundred li square, and enfeoff you 
with it.’ 


Master Mo spoke to Gongshang Guo, saying: ‘What did 
you make of the Yue king’s intentions? If you think the Yue 
king will listen to my words and will use my Way, then I 
shall go. But I shall require only enough food to fill my 
belly and enough clothing to cover my body, and I shall 
regard myself as an equal with the crowd of officials. What 
would I be able to do with enfeoffment? If the Yue king 
won’t listen to my words and won’t use my Way and I still 
go, then I would be treating yi like grain to sell. If I make it 
like grain to sell, I could just as well do this in the central 
states. Why would I need to go to Yue?’ 

49.14 Master Mo was going to travel. Wei Yue 9 asked him: 
‘When you get to see the noble men of the four regions, 
what will be the first thing you speak about?’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘Whenever one enters a country, one 
must pick out what is lundamental and devote one’s 
attention to it. If the country is disordered and confused, 
one will speak about “exalting worthiness” and “exalting 
unity”. If the country is poor, one will speak about 
“moderation in use” and ‘Moderation in funerals”. If the 
country has a liking for music and depravity, one will speak 
about “condemnation of music” and ‘Rejection of Fate”. If 
the country has fallen into licentiousness and lacks 
propriety, one will speak about “honouring Heaven” and 


“serving ghosts”. If the country is dedicated to invasion and 
oppression, one will speak about “universal love” and 
“condemning aggression”. 10 Therefore I say, pick out what 
is fundamental and devote your attention to it.’ 

49.15 Master Mo recommended Cao Gongzi to Song. 

After three years he returned. He saw Master Mo and said: 
‘When I first joined your school, I wore a short jacket and 
ate soup made from wild plants. Moreover, if I had this in 
the morning, I didn’t have it in the evening. And I had 
nothing to offer as a sacrifice to ghosts and spirits. Now, 
thanks to you, my family is better off than before. And 
because my family is better off, I can give my attention to 
the sacrifices to ghosts and spirits. Nevertheless, many of 
my family have died, the six animals are not flourishing, 
and I myself have become ill. I don’t know if your Way can 
be followed.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘Don’t think like this! What ghosts and 
spirits desire of a man is much. When he holds a high rank 
with a commensurate salary, they desire him to yield it to 
the worthy, and when he has much wealth, they desire him 
to distribute it to the poor. How could it be that ghosts and 
spirits only desire to snatch away the grain and seize the 
lungs? 11 Now you have a high rank with a commensurate 
salary, but have not yielded it to the worthy. This is the first 


misfortune. You have much, but you have not used it to 
distribute to the poor. This is the second misfortune. Now 
you serve ghosts and spirits by sacrifice and that is all. And 
yet you say, “Where is my sickness coming from?” This is 
like having a hundred gates, closing one, and then saying, 
“How did the robber enter?” How is it possible to be like 
this and still seek good fortune from ghosts and spirits?’ 

49.16 In Lu, the man responsible for sacrifices offered a 
single pig as a sacrifice and yet sought a hundred blessings 
from ghosts and spirits. 

When Master Mo heard this, he said: ‘This is not 
acceptable. To give a person little and ask from that person 
much would only make that person fearful of offerings 
from you. So if you sacrifice with one pig and yet seek a 
hundred blessings from ghosts and spirits, the ghosts and 
spirits will only be fearful of your sacrifice of oxen and 
sheep. In ancient times, the sage kings served ghosts and 
spirits by sacrifice and that is all. It would be better to 
remain poor than become rich by sacrificing one pig and 
seeking a hundred blessings.’ 

49.17 Master Peng Qingsheng said: ‘What has gone can be 
known; what is to come cannot be known.’ 



Master Mo asked: ‘Suppose your parents encountered 
difficulty when they were a hundred li away and there was a 
time limit of one day. If you reached them, they would live. 
If you did not reach them, they would die. Now, if on one 
side there was a strong cart and an excellent horse, and on 
the other side there was a worn-out old horse and a cart 
with wheels at the four corners, and you had to make a 
choice, which one would you use?’ 

He replied: ‘I would use the excellent horse and the 
strong cart, so I could arrive quickly.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘How is there not knowledge of what is 
to come?’ 

49.18 Meng Shan praised King Zi Lii, saying: ‘At an earlier 
time, during Bo Gong’s insurrection, 12 he seized King Zi 
Lii, attached a battleaxe to his waist and directed a sword 
straight at his heart. He then spoke to him, saying, “If you 
become king then you live; if you do not become king then 
you die.” King Zi Lii replied, “Why do you insult me? You 
killed my family members and now you tempt me with the 
kingdom of Chu. If I were to get the whole world and yet 
not be yi, I wouldn’t do it. How much more so is this the 
case with regard to Chu?” And he didn’t do it. How was 
King Zi Lii not renT 


Master Mo said: ‘There was a difficulty and he overcame 
it. Nevertheless, he was not ren. If he thought the king was 
without the Way, why didn’t he accept the offer and bring 
about order? If he thought Bo Gong was not yi, why did he 
not accept the kingship, put Bo Gong to death and then 
return to rule? This is why I say that meeting a difficulty 
and overcoming it is something, but it is not being ren.' 

49.19 Master Mo sent Sheng Chuo to serve Xiang Ziniu. 
Three times Xiang Ziniu invaded the territory of Lu and 
three times Sheng Chuo accompanied him. Master Mo 
heard about this and sent Gao Sunzi to request that he be 
withdrawn. 13 He said: ‘I sent Chuo so that he would stop 
arrogance and rectify depravity. Now Chuo receives a high 
salary, and yet he deceives his master. Three times his 
master invaded Lu and three times Chuo accompanied him. 
This is to whip a horse with its martingale. I have heard this 
- ‘To speak of yi but not practise it is to commit an offence 
knowingly.” It is not that Chuo didn’t know this. It is that 
salary triumphed over yi. ’ 

49.20 In former times, the people of Chu and the people of 
Yue fought a naval battle on the Jiang (Yangtse). The people 
of Chu went with the current when advancing, but against 
the current when retreating. When they saw an advantage, 


they advanced. But when they saw a disadvantage, their 
retreat was difficult. The people of Yiie went against the 
current when advancing, but with the current when 
retreating. When they saw an advantage, they advanced. But 
when they saw a disadvantage, their retreat was swift. 
Because of these circumstances, the people of'Yiie 
inflicted a crushing defeat on the people of Chu. Gongshu 
Zi 14 travelled south from Lu to Chu and immediately began 
making implements for naval warfare, preparing hooks and 
clamps. The hooks were for times of retreat and the clamps 
were for times of advance. Tire lengths of the hooks and 
clamps were made to be in accord with their weapons. Tire 
Chu weapons were standardized whereas those of the Yiie 
were not. Because of this, the people of Chu inflicted a 
crushing defeat on the people of Yue. Gongshu Zi was very 
pleased with his skill and spoke to Master Mo, saying: ‘I 
have hooks and clamps for naval battles. I don’t know if 
your v/ also has hooks and clamps.’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘Hie hooks and clamps of my yi have 
a greater worthiness than your hooks and clamps for naval 
battles. With my hooks and clamps, I hook by means of 
love and clamp by means of respect. If there is no hook 
through love, there is no closeness. If there is no clamp 
through respect, there is soon disrespect. If there is 
disrespect and no closeness, there is soon separation. 


Therefore, exchange of mutual love and mutual respect is 
like mutual benefit. Now if you hook people and stop them, 
people will also hook you and stop you. If you clamp 
people and oppose them, people will also clamp you and 
oppose you. So exchange of mutual hooking and mutual 
clamping is like mutual harm. Therefore, the hooks and 
clamps of my yi are more worthy than your hooks and 
clamps for naval battles.’ 

49.21 Gongshu Zi carved some bamboo to make a bird. 
When it was completed, he flew it. For three days, it did 
not come down. Gongshu Zi regarded himself as supremely 
skilful. Master Mo spoke to Gongshu Zi, saying: ‘Tbur 
making a bird is not like my making the linchpin of a cart 
wheel. In a few moments, I can carve a 3 cun piece of wood 
and it will bear a weight of 50 dan. Therefore, in terms of 
what is called an achievement, what is of benefit to people 
is spoken of as skilful, whereas what is not of benefit to 
people is spoken of as unskilful.’ 

Gongshu Zi spoke to Master Mo, saying: ‘Before I saw 
you, I wished to take Song. Now, having seen you, even if 
Song were to be given to me, if this was not in accord with 
yi, I would not take it.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘Before you had seen me, you wished to 
take Song, but after seeing me, even if Song were to be 



given to you, if this was not in accord withy/, you would 
not do it. This is my giving you Song. If you take yi to be 
fundamental, I shall also give you the world.’ 



50 


Gongshu 


50.1 Gongshu Pan 1 constructed cloud ladder equipment for 
Chu and having completed it, was about to use it to attack 
Song. When Master Mo heard of this, he set out from Qi 
and travelled for ten days and ten nights to reach Ying, 2 
where he met with Gongshu Pan. 

Gongshu Pan said: ‘Master, what do you instruct me to 
do?’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘In the Northern Region, there is a 
man who has insulted me. I wish to enlist your help to kill 
him.’ 

Gongshu Pan was not happy. 

Master Mo said: ‘Let me offer you ten pieces of gold.’ 

Gongshu Pan responded: ‘My yi (righteousness) is 
strong -1 do not kill people.’ 

Master Mo rose, bowed twice and said: ‘Let me explain. 
From the Northern Region, I heard that you were making 


cloud ladders and were about to attack Song. What crime is 
Song guilty of? The kingdom of Jing (Chu) has an excess of 
land but not enough people. To kill what there is not enough 
of in the struggle for what there is an excess of cannot be 
wise. To attack Song when it has committed no crime 
cannot be called being ren (loving, kind, humane and 
benevolent). To know this and not to contend cannot be 
called being loyal. To contend and not be successful cannot 
be called being strong. To take as yi (right action, righteous 
and just) not to kill few, yet to kill many cannot be called an 
understanding of analogy.’ 

Gongshu Pan conceded. 

Master Mo said: ‘This being so, why do you not stop?’ 

Gongshu Pan replied: ‘I cannot. I have already spoken of 
it to the King.’ 3 

Master Mo said: ‘Why not let me meet with the King.’ 

Gongshu Pan agreed. 

50.2 Master Mo met with the King and said: ‘Now suppose 
there is a man who casts aside his own decorated sedan and 
yet wishes to steal a broken-down carriage which his 
neighbour has; or a man who casts aside Iris own 
embroidered coat and yet wishes to steal a short, rough 
jacket which his neighbour has; or a man who casts aside 
his own grain and meat and yet wishes to steal chaff and 


dregs which his neighbour has. What sort of man would this 
be?’ 

The King replied: ‘He would certainly be a pathological 
thief.’ 

Master Mo said: ‘Tire land of Jing (Chu) is five thousand 
li square whereas the land of Song is only five hundred li 
square. Urey are, in comparison, like a decorated sedan and 
a broken-down carriage. Jing has Yunmeng Park. 
Rhinoceroses and various kinds of deer fill it. Tire fish, 
turtles and alligators in the Jiang and Han Rivers are the 
most abundant in the world. Song, it is said, does not even 
have pheasants, hares or foxes. It is like comparing grain 
and meat with dregs and husks. Jing has tall pines, elegant 
catalpas, cedars and camphor-laurels. Song has no tall 
trees. It is like comparing a garment that is embroidered 
and ornamented with one that is short and made of coarse 
cloth. I take the King’s business in attacking Song to be in 
the same class as these things. In my view, the great King 
will certainly damage yi, but will not achieve anything.’ 

Tire King replied: ‘That is all very well. However, 
Gongshu Pan has already prepared the cloud ladders for 
me, so I must take Song.’ 


50.3 Thereupon Master Mo went to see Gongshu Pan. He 
took off his belt and made a city wall of it. He made 



weapons with little sticks. Gongshu Pan devised nine 
different strategies for attacking the city, but nine times 
Master Mo repulsed him. Gongshu Pan used all his 
machines for attack, whereas Master Mo’s methods of 
defence were by no means exhausted. Gongshu Pan 
submitted, but said: ‘I know how I can oppose you, but I will 
not say.’ 

Master Mo also said: ‘I know how you would oppose me, 
but I will not say.’ 

The King of Chu asked him his reason. 

Master Mo said: ‘Gongshu Zi’s idea is just to have me 
killed. He thinks that if I am killed, Song would not be able 
to defend itself and could be [successfully] attacked. 
However, my disciple Qin Guli and three hundred men of 
that ilk have already prepared my machines of defence and 
are on the walls of Song awaiting the attack from Chu. Even 
if you kill me, you will not be able to overcome [their 
defence].’ 

Tire King said: ‘Good! Now I do not wish to attack Song.’ 

50.4 Master Mo returned. As he was passing through Song 
it rained heavily. He sought shelter at the gate but the 
gatekeeper would not let him enter. Master Mo said: ‘In the 
case of those who bring order to the spirit, the great 
majority of people don’t know of their achievement. In the 



case of those who contend in clear view, the great majority 
of people do know of their achievement.’ 



51 


Lost 




Part V 


THE DEFENCE OF A CITY 



Introductory Note 


The eleven extant chapters on the personnel, equipment and 
strategies to be used in the defence of a city are beset with 
the same textual problems as Part III. Yates, in Iris 1980 
thesis (T) devoted to the Defence chapters, speaks of the 
text of this part suffering ‘dismemberment and massive 
transpositions and losses of sections’, surmising that there 
should be at least twelve chapters, corresponding to the 
twelve techniques which Master Mo’s disciple Qin Guli 
lists in 52.1. In fact, only six are represented by a chapter, 
and some of these chapters are clearly missing material, hi 
addition there are many unknown characters, unknown 
pieces of equipment or weapons, and many lacunae. Simple 
errors of copying are a feature as are also the dislocation 
and duplication of substantial fragments. The material itself 
is less complex than Part HI, being basically descriptive, so 
where the text is reliable, interpretation is relatively 
straight-forward. 


Tlii s text follows the modem editions of Li Shenglong 
and of Zhou Caizhu and Qi Ruiduan, both of which follow 
Sun Yirang whose text has some rearrangements of the 
Daoist Patrology (DZ) text of chapters 52, 62 and 7 1 . For 
the numerous suggested emendations and interpretations of 
the DZ text, the reader should consult my bilingual edition. 


52 


Preparing the Wall and Gates 
(Bei Cheng Men) 


52.1 Qin Guli questioned Master Mo, saying: ‘According 
to the sage’s words, when the phoenix did not come forth, 
the feudal lords rebelled against the King of Zhou. 

Weapons and armies (i.e. warfare) then arose in the world, 
large [states] attacked small [states], and the strong seized 
the weak. If I wished to defend a small state, how would I 
go about it?’ 

Master Mo asked: ‘Defence against what kind of attack?’ 

Qin Guli replied, saying: ‘The [methods of] attack in 
frequent use at the present time are “approaches” (lin), 
hooks ( gou ), battering rams ( chong ), ladders (//). mounds 
(yin), water ( shui ), tunnels (xue), sudden attacks (tu), 
kong-tong, “ant approach” (massed infantry assault -yifu), 


tanks (fenwen) and high carts ( xuanche ). May I ask about 
defence against these twelve things?’ 

Master Mo said: ‘My city walls and moats would be in 
good repair, the instruments of defence would be prepared, 
fuel and grain would be sufficient, superiors and inferiors 
would be well disposed towards each other and I would get 
help from the neighbouring feudal lords on the four sides. 
This is how my defence would be managed. Furthermore, 
even if the Defender is skilful but the ruler doesn’t use 
him, it remains impossible to mount a successful defence. 
If the ruler does use the Defender, he must be capable in 
defence. If he is not capable and the ruler uses him, it 
remains impossible to mount a successful defence. So 
then, the Defender must be skilful and the ruler must 
respect and use him. Only then can there be a [successful] 
defence.’ 

52.2 In general, the methods of defending a besieged city 
involve walls that are thick and high; moats and ditches that 
are deep and wide; towers and parapets that are in good 
repair; defensive preparations that are appropriate and 
advantageous; fuel and food supplies that are sufficient for 
more than three months; a populace that is capable, with 
officers and people in harmony; many high officials of 
meritorious service to the ruler; a ruler who is himself 



trustworthy and principled; and people who are happy to 
defend to the death. Apart from these things, the ancestral 
graves of the defenders should be there; the mountains, 
forests, grasslands and marshes should be abundant and 
sufficient to be of benefit; the topography of the land 
should be such that it is difficult to attack and easy to 
defend; there should be deep enmity towards the foe and 
extraordinary attachment towards the ruler; the ruler’s 
rewards should be understood clearly enough to be relied 
upon, while his punishments should be severe enough to be 
intimidating. If these fourteen conditions are all met, the 
people will not harbour doubt about the ruler. Subsequently, 
there can be a successful defence of the city. If [any] one of 
these fourteen is lacking, then although the man 
responsible for defence may be skilful, he cannot 
effectively defend [the city]. 

52.3 In general, with regard to the methods of defending a 
city, city gates are prepared that are ‘hanging gates’ 
(portcullis gates), with a mechanism for raising and 
lowering them. Urey should be 2 zhang high and 8 chi 
wide, and consist of two equal leaves. The two leaves of the 
gate should overlap by 3 cun, and there should be a 
covering of earth on each leaf not exceeding 2 cun. A 
trench should be dug that is 1 zhang 5 [chi] deep in the 



middle, with a width comparable to that of the gate leaves. 
Hie length of the trench is determined by the strength of 
those digging it. At the head of the trench there should be a 
sluice gate and a place which can hold one man. When the 
enemy comes, give the order to bore holes in both gate 
leaves and cover them. Each gate leaf should have two 
holes and two covers, with a rope of 4 chi in length 
attached to one of them. At all four corners of the wall 
build high towers and parapets and depute the scions of 
noble houses to live in them. There they should await the 
enemy and observe the enemy’s appearance and the 
movements of their advance. Those who fail to wait should 
be executed. 

52.4 If the enemy makes tunnels and approaches through 
them, I urgently send the tunnel master to select officers to 
meet the enemy within the tunnels, equipping them with 
short bows with which to confront the enemy. The 
materials of people’s houses - wood, tiles and stones - can 
be added to the resources for the city’s defence and are all 
transported to the city. Hiose who don’t comply with the 
command are executed. Prepare all the construction 
implements as follows: every 7 chi have one hoe; every 5 
bu have one basket for carrying earth; for every five 
constructions have one iron hoe and one long axe with a 



handle 8 chi in length; every 10 hit have one sickle with a 
handle 8 chi in length; every 10 bu have one chopper and 
one long awl with a handle 6 chi in length and a head 1 chi 
in length. Sharpen the two points with an axe. Every 3 bu 
have one large lance (ting) 1 chi long and sharpened at the 
end for 5 cun. Two ting can be joined together and placed 
flat. If they are not placed flat, they are not convenient to 
use. The two ends of each ting are kept sharpened. If 
underground tunnels are used to counter [the enemy’s] 
underground tunnels, careful attention must be given to 
knowing the width or narrowness of the enemy’s 
underground tunnels. Orders must be given to make one’s 
own tunnels at an angle to the enemy tunnels and at the 
same level. 

Comment: This section may contain misplaced material: it starts and ends with 
tunnels, but the rest covers housing, building implements and weapons. 


52.5 Pieces of wood are gathered together and when there 
is enough are used to make bundles of brushwood with no 
pieces protruding from the ends of the bundles. Apiece of 
wood 1 zhang 7 chi long is placed on the outside of the 
bundles and they are bound together and piled up crosswise, 
lire outside is covered with a strong coating of earth, so as 
not to allow leakage in from above. There should be 
bundles of such a size that they can provide protection for a 



wall more than 3 zhang 5 c/nhigh. Use brushwood, wood 
and earth to add somewhat to the barrier, the objective 
being strength. Prepare the whole of the outer surface 
beforehand, so it can bear the smeared-on material and is 
adequate to act as a parapet. Coat the outer surface well so 
it can’t be burned or pulled up. 

Comment: This is about the chai tuan or ‘brushwood tie’ (Yates (T)), its 
preparation and (to some extent) its use. 


52.6 In the large wall, there should be small gates 1 zhang 
5 [chi] high and 4 chi wide. Make outer-wall gates 
(guomen). On the outer aspect of the outer-wall gates 
make a horizontal bar of two pieces of wood matching the 
gate. In the pieces of wood drill holes through which ropes 
are threaded and then led up to the battlements. 

Build a suspended bridge across the moat to allow 
people to cross into the city by means of the wooden 
bridge which has a slope to the outside of the wall and can 
be added to with additional timber. The angle of inclination 
is determined by the form of the wall. Have a 
supplementary parapet (?moat) within the wall. Rely on the 
inner parapet (?moat) in making the outer parapet (?moat). 
Between the two parapets (?moats) dig a trench 1 zhang 5 
chi deep, in which an obstruction can be established using 
sharp stakes. Fire can be set there to meet the enemy. 



Near the wall, build ling-er towers which have two 
levels. At the lower level, outside the wall and between it 
and the parapets, dig a trench measuring 1 zhang 5 [chi] 
deep and 1 zhang 2 [chi] wide. The appearance of the tower 
is like a ling-er. [From] all [these ling-er towers] order 
strong, able-bodied men to go forth to confront the enemy. 
The skilled archers who are responsible for firing arrows 
should be provided with sharp arrows. 

Comment: This describes small gates in the wall; the structure of outer-wall ( guo) 
gates; the building of a suspension bridge over the moat and other defensive 
constructions inside the moat, and the ling-er , thought to be a type of tower. There 
is considerable doubt about whether a hao (moat) or a die (parapet, battlement) is 
being described, and uncertainty about what a ling-er was. 


52.7 Set up a bamboo fence. In all cases extend it to join 
the parapet. Make it 6 chi high with spaces 4 chi wide, 
where all those armed with crossbows can take their 
positions. There should be ‘revolving shooting machines’ 
(zhuansheji), which are 6 chi high and buried 1 chi in the 
ground. Two pieces of wood joined together are used to 
make protective shields (wen), which are 2 chi long. 
Through the centres of these drill holes to accommodate a 
connecting arm straight against the wall. Every 20 bu there 
should be one of these (i.e. a ‘revolving shooting machine’ 
plus its protective shield). [Put someone in charge of it 



and] order skilled archers to assist him. No one is allowed 
to leave his post. 

Comment: If it is accepted that some form of fence is being described, it is not 
clear whether the second sentence is describing a support structure in the fence for 
the ‘revolving shooting machine’ (Yates (T)), or if two separate matters are being 
considered: a protective fence and a ‘revolving shooting machine’. 


52.8 On the wall, there should be a tower with four pillars 
every 100 bu. All the pillars should have a connecting 
foundation. lire lower (level of the tower) should be 1 
zhang high and the upper (level) 9 chi high. Each tower 
should be 1 zhang 6 chi in width and length, and all should 
have a door. 

On the wall, there should be a connecting passage (tu) 9 
chi long, 10 chi wide and 8 chi high every 30 bu. Adoor 3 
chi wide and 2 chi long should be cut in the connecting 
passage. 

On the wall, there should be fire javelins ( zanhuo ), 
which are of a length commensurate with the height of the 
wall and which can be lit at the tip. 

Comment: Three things on the wall are described: a tower characterized by four 
supporting pillars which are connected, and tu and zanhuo, which Yates (T) calls 
‘sally ports’ and ‘fire javelins’, respectively. 


52.9 At intervals of 9 chi on the wall, place one crossbow, 
one halberd, one bludgeon, one axe and one hacker. In all 
cases, pile up ‘thunder stones’ and caltrops. 



Qu (shields) 1 zhang 5 chi high and 1 zhang 6 chi wide 
are made. Their poles should be 1 zhang 2 chi high and 
their limbs 6 chi high. Urey should be buried to a depth of 3 
chi with the wooden shield no nearer than 5 cun to the 
parapet. 

[Make] screens 8 chi high and 7 chi wide. Tire thickness 
of the wood should be 5 chi and in the middle of the screen 
make a ‘bridge’ with a rope attached to the ends. When the 
enemy approaches, one man is delegated to raise and lower 
this and must not leave his post. 

On the wall, there should be one jiche (trebuchet) every 
20 bu. When the enemy approaches by tunnelling, don’t use 
this number. 

On the wall, there should be one movable furnace every 
30 bu. 

Comment: The list of things here to be available on the wall includes weapons of 
various sorts, shields and screens, and stoves or furnaces. The description of a qu 
has been made consistent with Mozi 71.3; see also 52.17 and Yates (T), pp. 405-7. 
On the jiche, see also, e.g., Mozi 52.15 and 52.26, and Yates (SC), pp. 203-30. 


52.10 Tire utensils for holding water must have a ladle of 
lacquered hemp and should be made of hide. There should 
be one (such utensil) every 10 bu. Tire handle should be 8 
chi long and the ladle should have a capacity of 2 to 3 dou. 

Old or new hemp, 6 chi in length, is used (to fashion the 
handle). Tire middle of the handle is curved and should be 1 



zhang long. There should be one every 10 hu and it should 
be strong and durable. 

On the wall, every 10 hit there should be one shovel. 

There should be earthenware pots for water with 
capacities of 3 dan and upwards, small and large [pots] 
being mixed together. And there should be hide basins and 
calabashes as two additional utensils. 

For the soldiers, there should be 2 dou of dried food per 
man. This should be prepared and protected from rain, and 
stored in a dry place. At the appropriate time, the defenders 
should be sent to a place between the inner and outer 
parapets to eat. 

52.11 Utensils should be set up and prepared for scattering 
sand, small stones and pieces of iron. They should all be of 
rough earthenware in construction. Potters should be 
directed to make a small number of these, with the biggest 
being able to hold 1 to 2 dou. Until the time comes to use 
them, they should be bound together with rope. 

Tightly bound stakes are placed at certain points on the 
wall and levelled off at a height of 1 zhang 2 [chi]. These 
are sharpened at one end. 

Small doors are made with two leaves which can be 
opened and closed independently. 



To relieve the city gate and the moat, use flaming torches 
in fighting. Bring in bellows. In addition, use brushwood to 
make a barrier between the outer and inner parapets. 

Ling-ding (wide-bellied flasks) are placed at intervals of 
3 zhang. And interdigitating ‘dog’s teeth’ are set up. One 
man is stationed every 10 bu within the brushwood 
[barrier], armed with a crossbow. Prepare stakes ( gouxi ) 
and [use them] to surround him. 

52.12 In seeking relief from attack by fire delivered by 
flaming arrows shot at the gates in the wall, drill [holes] 
above the leaves of the doors, make posts and cover them 
with earth. Prepare hempen ladles and hide buckets to 
contain water for relief. Hie door leaves, the door 
surrounds and the bars supporting the doors should all have 
holes drilled in them to a depth of ‘A chi. Every 1 cun, 
knock in a peg which is 2 cun in length and projects 1 cun. 
These pegs should be 7 cun apart and covered thickly with 
earth as a preparation against fire. Above the gates in the 
wall, excavate holes for relief from fire, each one holding a 
container of water with a capacity of 3 dan or greater; 
small and large containers are mixed together. Hie gate bar 
and lever must be made strong by plating them with a strong 
metal such as iron. Hie gate bolts should be double and 
coated with iron, as they must be strong. Hie locking bar 



should be 2 chi long and there should be one lock. It is 
sealed by means of the Defender’s seal. From time to time, 
men are sent to check whether the seal has been moved, and 
on the depth of insertion of the bar into the supporting 
pillars. All those responsible for the gate are prohibited 
from carrying axes of any sort, chisels, saws, or hammers. 

52.13 On the wall, every 2 bu there should be one shield 
(ju) with an upright pole 1 zhang 3 chi long. The top of the 
shield should be 10 zhang in length and its transverse arms 
6 chi long. Every 2 bu there should be one protective 
screen (da) which is 9 chi wide and 12 chi high. 

Every 2 bu place a lian-ting (linked flail), a long axe and 
a long hammer - one of each - and twenty lances, these 
being spread over every 2 bu. 

Every 2 bu there should be one wooden crossbow that 
must be able to fire [an arrow] 50 bu or more. As well, 
there should be many arrows. If these are not of bamboo, 
[then wood from] the hu, the peach, the zhe, or the elm will 
do. Asubstantial collection of iron arrows should also be 
added, these being distributed between the firing areas and 
the longcong (watchtowers). 

Every 2 bu pile up stones, each stone weighing 10 jun or 
more, there being five hundred stones. If there are no 



stones, use caltrops and tiles to withstand [the enemy]. 
Both of these can be good methods. 

Every 2 bu have piles of reed torches, 1 wei (span) in 
size and 1 zhang long, 20 in all. 

Comment: Sections 13-16 have a recurring format listing various items under the 
heading of the frequency of occurrence, although similar descriptions are 
interspersed throughout 52. Yates points out that the ju (shield) and da (screen) 
were very important components of the defensive apparatus: see Yates (SC), pp. 
405-9, where there are diagrams of both. On ‘caltrops’, Yates (T) writes: ‘Tribulus 
terrestris (caltrop) is a plant with sharp spikes. It is unclear whether the Mohist is 
advocating the use of the plant itself or wooden or iron spikes known also as 
“caltrops”. The device was used throughout Chinese history as an effective means 
to halt or slow either an infantry or cavalry advance.’ On the weight of the stones, 
the original text has ‘a thousand ( qian) jun ’; this has been emended to shi (10). 


52.14 Every 5 bu there should be an earthenware jar with a 
ladle to hold water; the capacity of the jar should be 1 dou 
of water. 

Every 5 bu there should be a pile of darts ( goushi ), 500 
in all. The darts should be 3 chi long and covered over with 
rushes. The ends should be sharpened and the darts securely 
bound to a small wooden stake. 

Every 10 bu there should be a pile of firewood, each pile 
being greater than 2 wei in circumference and 8 chi long, 

20 piles in all. 

Every 25 bu there should be one furnace with each 
furnace having an iron pot (qian) and each pot a capacity of 



greater than 1 dan. These can be used to prepare boiling 
water. As well, prepare sand - not less than 1,000 dan. 

Every 30 bu set up one houlou (observation tower), 
extending 4 chi beyond the parapet, 3 chi in width and 4 chi 
long. It should be surrounded by wooden planking on three 
sides. Mud is used to conceal it, and in summer it is 
covered to protect it above. 

Comment: This lists a miscellaneous group: water containers, firewood, furnaces, 
weapons (darts - although there is some question about goushi ) and a type of 
tower. Yates (T) provides a list of the different types of tower described, 
identifying six in all, and explains the houlou as a ‘tower for sitting and watching’. 


52.15 Every 50 bu there should be one jiche. The axle of 
the jiche must be of iron. 

Every 50 bu there should be a protected latrine 
completely surrounded by a wall 8 chi high. 

Every 50 bu there should be a door. The door must have 
a locking mechanism above to defend it. 

Every 50 bu there should be a pile of firewood weighing 
not less than 300 dan. It should be well covered with mud 
so fire from without cannot damage it. 

Comment: It is not clear what the ‘door’ is; and Yates (T) has ‘room’. 


52.16 Every 100 bu have one longcong (watchtower) 
which rises from the ground 5 zhang. It should have three 
levels. Its width at the bottom should be 8 chi at the front 



and 13 chi behind. As it gets higher it should become 
narrower according to circumstances. 

Every 100 hu have one wooden tower. The width of the 
tower should be 9 chi across at the front and its height 
should be 7 chi. The tower’s chimney and screen should be 
12 chi away from the wall. 

Every 100 hu have one well. Each well should have ten 
water containers that are attached to a wooden post. The 
capacity of the water containers should range from 4 to 6 
clou, [and there should be] a hundred [of them]. 

Every 100 bu there should be one pile of straw of 
different lengths - fifty bundles of a circumference greater 
than 2 wei. 

Every 100 bu there should be a large \u (shield). The 
large lu should be 4 chi wide and 8 chi high. Urey are for 
approaching the enemy in tunnels. 

Every 100 bu there should be a concealed drain, 3 chi 
wide and 4 chi deep. 

Every 200 bu there should be one lilou (standing tower). 
The part within the wall should be 2 zhang 5 chi high, while 
the part that projects crosswise should be 5 chi. 

52.17 The top of the wall should be 3 to 4 bu wide to allow 
fighting to take place on it. There should be a small wall 
with holes for observation (embrasures); this wall should 



be 3 chi wide and 2 chi 5 cun high. Hie steps should be 2 
chi 5 cun high, and their width and length should both be 3 
chi. Hie width of the ascent should be 6 chi in each case. 

On the four corners of the wall there should be small 
dwellings 5 chi in height where the four commandants 
reside. 

On the wall, every 7 chi there should be one qu, 1 zhang 
5 chi long, buried to a depth of 3 chi. It should extend 
beyond the parapet for 5 cun [so] the exposed part is 1 
zhang 2 chi long and the [horizontal] arms are 6 chi long. 

In the middle of the wooden surface a hole is cut with an 
internal diameter of 5 cun. Hie front end of the qu should 
be lower than the parapet by 4 cun, this being appropriate. 
Drill the qu and excavate a hole, then cover it with tiles. On 
winter days, block it with horse dung, then await orders for 
its use. Alternatively, use tiles to make the pit. 

On the wall, every 10 hu there should be one post 1 
zhang in length. In the case of those hurling water, they 
grasp the post to throw it. Every 50 bu there should be one 
latrine. Hie latrines on or below the wall are places for 
accumulation of filth. Hiose entering a latrine should not 
be carrying anything. 

52.18 On the wall, there should be one jiche every 30 bu. 
When confronting tunnelling, don’t use [this number]. 



On the wall, every 50 bu there should be one set of steps 
(a staircase). The height (of the steps) should be 2 chi 5 
cun and the length (overall) 10 bu. On the wall, every 50 bu 
there should be one small tower; this must have two levels. 

There should be one wooden tower every 100 bu with an 
external suspended door. On either side, there should be a 
pit. A screen should be added to the tower, and there should 
be a wooden walkway for the purpose of rescue from the 
outside. 

On the wall, there should be no other buildings at all. 
Certainly any building in which people can conceal 
themselves must be completely removed. 

Placed in a circle around the wall at 100 bu intervals, 
there should be collections of firewood, each collection 
being not less than 3,000 (?300) dan\ skilfully cover these 
with earth. 

On the wall, every 10 men should have a file leader 
(platoon commander). Tire file leaders should be under a 
subordinate officer ( lishi ), and there should be one post 
captain. 

Every 100 bu there should be one post (ting). Tire height 
of the walls should be 1 zhang 4 chi and the thickness 4 
chi. Tire doors should have two leaves which can be opened 
and closed independently. Each post should have one 
captain (wei). Those chosen for this position must be 



reliable and trustworthy men who can bear the 
responsibility. 

Comment: There are several issues: in the first paragraph, does dui refer to 
tunnelling or a battle line; in the second, is kongyong a tower (Yates (T)); in the 
third, is this a suspended door or some kind of shooting tower as proposed (Yates 
(T)); and in the fifth, the amount of firewood - 3,000 dan - seems an awful lot! 


52.19 Two lodgings (of the file leader and the post captain) 
should share one well and one furnace. Ashes, chaff, grain 
and horse dung are all carefully collected and stored. 

On the wall, prepare the following things: shielding 
screens (?shields and screens), jiche, trestle bridges, 
movable towers, chopping tools, well-sweeps, linked flails, 
long axes, long hammers, long hoes, rams, attack carts 
(flying battering-rams), suspended bridges and piqu. There 
should be one tower every 50 bu. Below the parapet make 
holes, one every 3 chi. Make well-sweeps with a 
circumference of 4'A chi, such that they can be moved by 
the strength of one man. 

Have tiles and stones to a weight greater than 2 jin. 

On the wall, there should be sand, one pile every 50 bu. 
A furnace is set up with an iron vessel on it with the sand in 
the same place. 

Pieces of timber of 2 wei in circumference and of 
lengths greater than 1 zhang 2 chi are skilfully joined 



together [to make] what are called a longzong (observation 
post). Every 50 bu there should be one. 

There should be wooden bridges 3 zhang in length, and 
not less than fifty of these. Urey can be used to send men 
for urgent construction of a breastwork which is covered 
with tiles. 

Use earthenware or wood to make pitchers which have a 
capacity of 10 don or more. There should be ten of these 
every 50 bw, fill them with water in readiness for use. 
[Also,] every 10 bu there should be two pitchers with a 
capacity of 5 dou or more. 

Comment: Another miscellaneous collection of things that should be on the wall: 
piqu is not identified; xin gao may mean well-sweeps, some kind of torch (Yates 
(T)) or even two separate things; the meaning of the second paragraph is not clear; 
Yates (T) believes that longzong are spears of some sort. 


52.20 Family members who live in the wards below the 
wall are each required to defend to their left and right and 
to the front and rear, just like those on the wall. When the 
city is small but the people are many, send those who are 
old and frail to the capital and to other large cities for 
protection. 

If when the enemy comes, it is judged they will certainly 
attack, the commander [of the defence] first [orders the] 
destruction of the dwellings near to the wall, but not that 
they be burned. When the enemy is below the wall, he 



should change the duties of the officers and soldiers at the 
appropriate times, but not change their support personnel. 
Hie support personnel must not be on the wall. 

When the enemy is below (outside) the wall, there 
should be a collection of all bowls and jars which are then 
piled beneath the wall. Have one pile every 100 bu with 
five hundred items per pile. 

There must be no houses within the gate of the wall. The 
housing for senior officers responsible for defence must 
be closely guarded and places must be established for the 
support staff. The building should have parapets 4 chi high. 
The main gate should always be closed. There should be 
two men to defend the gate and one man for each parapet. 

The road outside the city should be kept clear. In the area 
for 100 bu beyond the moat, walls and trees, whether large 
or small, should be destroyed or cut down and then moved 
away. On the routes by which the enemy might approach, 
whether the main road or other thoroughfares, there should 
be large towers. Bamboo arrows should be set up in the 
water [of the moat]. 

52.21 Below the defence headquarters (Defender’s hall), 
construct a large tower that is high and near the wall and has 
free access on all sides below the building. If visitors 
come, they are met in the middle of the road. And the 



visitors must wait to be seen. At the appropriate time, three 
elders are summoned to the defence headquarters to take 
part in planning for the outcome (success or failure). When 
their policies are to be used and the plans and stratagems 
are in accord, then they enter the defence area. Having 
entered the defence area, they are not allowed to go on to 
the wall, or to leave their dwellings. Hrose of the defenders 
who have a good knowledge of the height of the wall and 
the depth of the moat should set up the defence. Morning 
and evening, the drum is sounded to stir on [the defenders]. 
Young men are used for ease of defence. 

52.22 Methods of defence: every 50 bu there should be ten 
able-bodied young men, twenty able-bodied young women 
and ten old people and children; that is, a total of forty 
people every 50 bu. With respect to soldiers for the towers 
below the wall, there should be uniformly one every bu, so 
for 20 bu there are twenty men. Whether the city is large 
or small, if this is taken as the standard, it will, in fact, be 
enough to defend a besieged [city], 

52.23 When the enemy relies on the ‘ant approach’ (mass 
infantry assault) from four sides, if the leader of the 
defence knows this beforehand, it is to his advantage and 
the enemy’s disadvantage. If the enemy attacks in lines and 



the number is one hundred thousand, then the attack does 
not exceed four lines. At the most, the width of the front is 
500 bu, while the intermediate front is 300 hit and the 
smallest front is 50 bu. When it does not exceed 150 bu, 
the leader of the defence is at an advantage and the enemy 
is at a disadvantage. In the case of a 500 bu front, use one 
thousand able-bodied men, two thousand able-bodied 
women and a thousand old people and children, giving four 
thousand in all, which is sufficient to meet them. These are 
the numbers for defending against a front. And let the old 
people and children who do not serve [at the front itself] 
defend on the wall, but not face the front. 

52.24 When a city’s general goes forth, he must have a 
clear signal flag to let the officers and people all know 
about it. When he has a retinue of anything from ten men to 
over a hundred men, or if a general goes forth but does not 
carry a signal flag, or if the retinue is not composed of his 
own troops or does not have a signal flag, the general 
leading a thousand men or more stops him and does not let 
him proceed. If he does go forth, and officers and soldiers 
follow him, they are all beheaded. All this is made known 
to the commander. These are important prohibitions in the 
defence of a city. That traitorous elements may arise is 
something that must be given careful attention. 



Comment: Yates (T) comments that this section ‘perhaps belongs to a separate 
fragment, [and] gives the procedure to be followed when the Mohist Defender and 
his retinue leave the town or city after the successful defence’. 


52.25 On the wall, ‘goblets’ (torch holes) are excavated, 3 
chi below the movable parapets. Urey are wide at the 
opening and narrow within; there should be one every 5 bu. 
Agoblet can contain a flaming reed torch. lire highest 
goblets are at a height of 6 chi and the lowest at 3 chi. Tire 
spacing is determined by the requirement of being able to 
see what is going on. Outside the wall, a ditch is dug at a 
distance of 7 chi from the wall and there is a suspended 
bridge (drawbridge). If the area outside the wall is too 
narrow and a ditch cannot be dug, it is permissible to have 
no ditch. On the wall, every 30 bu there should be one 
long-zao (movable furnace) and each person should grasp a 
torch 5 chi in length. If the enemy is outside the wall, the 
torches are lit when the sound of the drum is heard. When 
the drum sounds a second time, the torches are placed in 
the goblets to illuminate the outside. 

52.26 The various jiche all have iron bands, their pillars are 
1 zhang 7 chi long and they are buried to a depth of 4 chi. 
Their [throwing] arms are greater than 3 zhang and up to 3 
zhang 5 chi. Their majia (slings) are 2 chi 8 cun long. Tire 
jiche’ s strength is tested using a wooden bar [to strike 



against]. Three-quarters of the arm [of the jiche ] lies above 
[the pivot]. 

In the case of the jiche, the arm is 3 zhang in length and 
three parts in four are above [the pivot]. The sling is 
situated in the centre of the exposed three-quarters; it must 
be 2 chi 8 cun in length. The arm should be 24 chi in 
length. Less than this it is of no use. Control the pivot using 
large cart wheels. The trebuchet’s posts are 1 zhang 2!4 chi 
in length. Every trebuchet has iron bands. Behind, there is a 
supporting cart. 

52.27 When the enemy attacks by filling in the moat, make 
water jars which are 4 chi deep, firmly sealed and buried in 
the ground, there being one every 10 chi. Cover them with 
an earthenware cover and await the order [for their use]. 

Use pieces of wood 1 wei in circumference and 2 chi 4 fen 
long, and make a hollow in the centre. In this, place burning 
charcoal and cover it. Then, using a jiche, project it [at the 
enemy]. Make [bundles of] caltrops to throw [at the 
enemy], 2 chi 5 cun long and 2 wei or above in size. [Above 
the gates,] fix wooden spikes, the spikes being 7 cun long 
with a gap of 6 cun between spikes. Their ends are 
sharpened. Have gouzou (stakes) which are 7 cun wide and 
1 chi 8 cun long with a ‘claw’ 4 cun long. Set them like 
dog’s teeth (i.e. interdigitating). 



Comment: This section may be four fragments: filling in the moat, the use of 
caltrops, wooden spikes and gouzou. Yates (T) (and this edition) has it as a separate 
and complete fragment, which he suggests might be displaced from a lost chapter on 
‘mounding in the moat’, and he links it with 52.11. 


52.28 Master Mo said: ‘Among the methods of defending a 
city, there must be a calculation of the amount of wood 
within the city wall. That which ten men can carry is taken 
as 10 qie. That which five men can carry is taken as 5 qie. 

In general, the amount is determined by the number of men. 
In respect to what constitutes a qie of firewood and fuel, 
those who are strong have their qie and those who are weak 
have their qie, this being designated as their responsibility. 
So, in each case, the actual weight of the qie determines 
what each person takes as their responsibility. If there is no 
food in the city, the magnitude (of the qie) is reduced.’ 

Comment: Some recent Chinese editions combine 52.28 and 52.29, with both 
attributed to Master Mo. 


52.29 At a distance of 5 bu beyond the city gates, there 
should be a large trench. Where the ground is high, dig it 1 
zhang 5 chi deep; where the ground is low, it should go 
down until there is water, or 3 chi, and then stop. Set up zei 
(?stakes) in the middle of it. Have above it a suspended 
bridge (drawbridge) with a concealed mechanism to control 
its movement. The upper surface (of the bridge) should be 
covered with brushwood and earth so it looks like a path. 


On either side, there should be a ditch that cannot be 
jumped across. (Hie defenders) should go forth to 
challenge the enemy and feign defeat, so the enemy 
pursues them to enter (the city). Then activate the bridge 
mechanism so the enemy can be seized. Then the enemy 
becomes fearful and stricken with doubt, and so retreats. 



53 


Preparing Against the High and 
Adjacent 
(.Bei Gao Lin) 


53.1 Master Qin bowed repeatedly and said: ‘May I ask 
what is to be done when the enemy piles up earth to make a 
high mound in order to approach our wall, places firewood 
and earth on top to make a yangqian (high mound) and 
after covering it with shields at the front, sets it up against 
the wall with [soldiers carrying] weapons and crossbows on 
top of it?’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘Are you asking about the defence 
against the yangqian ? Those who would use such a ramp 
are stupid. [It is a device] which is sufficient to wear out the 
soldiers, but not sufficient to harm the city. In defence, 
make ‘terrace walls’ and bring them adjacent to the 
yangqian. On the left and right, project rams, each 20 chi 



in length. Hie movable walls should be 30 chi high; 
powerful crossbows are fired from them. If you make use 
of these ingenious devices, the yangqian attack can be 
defeated.’ 

Comment: This exchange is similar to 71.1: how to defend against the yangqian 
(yangqin in 71.1). Master Mo here recommends the construction of‘terrace walls 
or ‘movable walls’, but in 71.1 recommends the bombardment of the enemy with 
arrows and stones. Crossbows can be used against the enemy from these terrace 
walls, so the penultimate sentence may suggest using the jiche (trebuchets) (Yates 
(T)) or the joined crossbow described in detail in 53.2. 


53.2 In preparing against the high and adjacent (?the lin or 
‘overlook cart’), use the ‘joined crossbow’ carriage (liannu 
che). [This is made of] timbers 1 chi square and is of a 
length corresponding to the wall’s thickness. It has two 
axles and four wheels, the wheels being inside the frame. 
The inside itself is divided into upper and lower levels. 
Both left and right sides have two vertical posts each, and 
left and right sides have a horizontal beam. Tire left and 
right ends of both horizontal beams all have a tenon which 
projects straight out for 4 cun. To the left and right the 
crossbows are all bound to the vertical posts. All the 
strings, right up to the main string, are linked together with 
a ‘tooth’. Tire crossbow ‘arm’ (?stock) at the front and back 
is level with the frame [of the carriage] which is 8 chi high. 
The crossbow pivot extends 3 chi and 5 cun below the 



frame. The ‘joined crossbow’ (lian nu) control mechanism 
and its housing are made of bronze [requiring] 1 dan and 30 
jin. The string is drawn around a windlass. Hie size of the 
frame is 3!4 wei (spans). To the left and right there are 
‘teeth’ 3 cun square. Hie wheels [of the cart] are 1 chi 2 
cun thick. Hie ‘arms’ for the ‘teeth’ are 1 chi 4 cun wide, 7 
cun thick and 6 chi long. External to the ‘arms’ and level 
with the frame there is a ‘claw’ which is 1 chi 5 cun long 
and extends transversely on both sides. It is 6 cun wide, 3 
cun thick and of the same length as the frame. Hiere is an 
aiming mechanism which is able to rise or fall and can be 
directed upwards or downwards. Hie base of the crossbow 
should weigh 1 dan and be made from timbers 1 wei 5 cun 
in size. The arrows are 10 chi long and have a cord attached 
to the end like a yishe (arrow firer) which can be wound 
back by a windlass. Hie arrows extend above the crossbow 
‘arms’ by 3 chi. Hiere is no limit to the number of 
crossbows. Sixty [large arrows] are fired and retrieved, 
whereas small arrows are not retrieved. Ten men control 
this cart. When an attack is seen, the enemy can be fired at 
from the high towers, while on the wall a protective screen 
is used against enemy arrows. 

Comment: A detailed description of the device for firing multiple arrows: a 
multiple-bolt arbalest. But it is not clear precisely how or against what it is being 
deployed. For detailed descriptions of it, see Yates (SC), pp. 187-99 and 440-41. 



54 


Lost 



55 


Lost 



56 


Preparing Against Ladders 
(Bei Di) 


56.1 Qin Guli served Master Mo for three years until his 
hands and feet were covered with calluses and his face was 
blackened by the sun. He had laboured to be of service and 
had not dared to express his own wishes. Master Mo 
greatly pitied him, so taking some purified wine and dried 
meat, he went to Mount Tai, cleared a patch of grass to sit 
on and made an offering to Qin. Qin bowed several times 
and sighed. 

Master Mo said: ‘What else do you wish?’ 

Qin bowed repeatedly and said: ‘Dare I ask about the Way 
of defence?’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘Put it aside for the moment! Put it 
aside for the moment! In ancient times, there were those 
who had this skill, but within they did not become close to 



the people, and without they did not manage the affairs of 
government. When few, they fought against many. When 
weak, they made light of the strong. Hie result was that they 
themselves died, their states were lost and they became the 
laughing stock of the world. You should be very careful 
about this. Otherwise, I fear you will end up a corpse 
yourself.’ 

Qin again made obeisance and bowed his head, wishing 
to ask further about the Way of defence. ‘Dare I ask what is 
to be done when enemies are many and brave, when they 
have filled in our moat, when the troops advance in a 
phalanx, when the cloud ladders are in position, when the 
equipment for attack is already complete, when the 
warriors are increasingly numerous, and they are making a 
headlong rush to scale our walls?’ 

Comment: Hie introduction of the cloud ladder (yun di), 
said to have been invented by Master Mo’s rival Gongshu 
Pan (see Mozi 50.1). 

56.2 Master Mo said: ‘Are you asking about defence 
against cloud ladders (i.e. scaling ladders)? Cloud ladders 
are heavy pieces of equipment and moving them is very 
difficult. Hie defence consists of “platform (movable) 
walls” ( xingcheng ) with various towers placed at intervals 



as a means of encircling their centre. By taking the 
appropriate width or narrowness as the measure, surround 
the centre with rush screens, but do not widen its position. 
Hie pattern for “platform (movable) walls” is that they are 
20 chi higher than the city wall with a 10 chi wide parapet 
added on top. To the left and right project rams (/«), each 
20 chi long. The [various towers] are tall and broad in the 
manner of the “platform (movable) walls”. Holes are made 
as for smoking out rats, and woven screens are set up on 
the outside. The “ingenious machines”, battering rams, 
(movable) bridges and “platform (movable) walls” are 
deployed over a width commensurate with that of the 
advancing line of enemy forces. Interspersed among these 
are “chisels” and piercing implements, using ten men to 
manage a battering ram and five men to control a piercing 
implement; all the men must be strong. Order those with an 
unwavering gaze to keep watch on the enemy, using the 
drum to give the signal to shoot at them from both sides 
and continuously. Set the crossbows into action against 
them and from the wall above harass them below with 
arrows, stones, sand and coals, falling like rain. Use blazing 
wood and boiling water to burn and scald them. Examine 
rewards and carry out punishments. Make plans in a calm 
way but follow them with action that is swift so you don’t 



let anxieties arise. This is how an attack by cloud ladders 
can be defeated.’ 


56.3 In the defence with moving parapets, make them 6 chi 
high and at one level. Swords are set up on their faces and 
fired by a mechanism. If the battering rams come, release 
them. If they don’t come, leave them set up. Cavities are 
made, one every 3 chi. Cylindrical caltrops are put in and 
must be used against troop lines. Pull them back and forth 
with a cart. 

Comment: On cylindrical caltrops, see Yates (SC), p. 433. 


56.4 Arrange palisades outside the wall at a distance of 10 
chi from it, the palisades being 10 chi thick. Collect timber 
for the palisades, both large and small pieces, and cut off 
the roots completely. Then, cut the pieces into 10 chi 
lengths to make a strong construction that cannot be pulled 
up. Every 20 bu, there should be one sha, each sha having 
one ge, the ge being 10 chi thick. In a sha there are two 
gates, each gate being 5 chi wide. In each palisade there is 
one gate which is shallowly buried and not heavily built, so 
it is easy to pull up. On the wall and facing towards the 
palisade gate, set up things to throw. 

Comment: This section describes the construction of a palisade fence with gates 
and the use of the sha. It is not clear what a sha (or a ge) was - probably some kind 
of structure divided by partitions which soldiers used to protect and conceal 



themselves before they went forth beyond the fence. Yates (SC), p. 481, translates 
sha as ‘Death’; others link it with ‘scatter’, in the sense of a place from which 
soldiers scatter. 


56.5 [In the case of] ‘hanging fires’, every 4 chi there 
should be one stake with a hook on it and every 5 bu one 
furnace with a brazier of charcoal at the doors of the 
furnace. The enemy soldiers are allowed to enter fully, 
upon which the gates are set ablaze with ‘hanging fires’ to 
follow. Send out carriers and set them up, their width being 
equivalent to that of the enemy line. Have one fire between 
two carriers. When everything is set up, await the sound of 
the drum and set them alight, then release them all together. 
If the enemy troops extinguish the fire and attack again, the 
‘hanging fires’ are again released, bringing the enemy great 
distress and causing them to lead their forces away and 
flee. Then we give the order for our crack troops to go out 
in all directions from the ‘sally ports’ and attack the fleeing 
enemy. Order the brave soldiers and generals all to go forth 
when they hear the sound of the drum on the wall, and to re¬ 
enter when they hear the sound of the drum on the wall 
again. As before, when sending forth soldiers, create a 
diversion. In the middle of the night, create a clamour of 
drums on the wall on all sides, so there is inevitably doubt 
within enemy ranks. By this, you will certainly rout the 
army and kill the general. Put on white garments as clothes 



and use shouts to communicate with each other. In this way, 
the attack by cloud ladders can be defeated. 

Comment: On ‘hanging fires’, see Yates (SC), p. 481. He uses ‘sally ports’ for the 
exit gates in the palisades. 



57 


Lost 



58 


Preparing Against Water (Flooding) 
(Bei Shui ) 


58.1 Within the wall, but outside the trench, make an 
encircling road 8 bu wide. In preparing against water 
(flooding), make a careful estimation of the height of the 
ground at all points. Where the ground within the wall is 
sloping down (low), [create] a tile-lined channel in it 
extending to low ground. Wells should be dug at the 
deepest places in the ground. Then place a measuring tile in 
each well and when the depth of the water outside exceeds 

1 zhang, dig water channels within the wall. 

58.2 Boats are joined together [in pairs] to make 10 lin 
(‘approaches’), each ‘approacher’ having thirty men. Each 
man is in charge of a crossbow and four of every ten men 
have a youfang. It is necessary for those skilled in boats to 
make fenwen (‘tanks’). Twenty such craft constitute a 



‘squadron’. Thirty men, capable and strong, are chosen for 
each craft. Of these, twelve men wield a youfang and wear 
armour and leather helmets, while the other eighteen men 
have a miao. Before training these capable soldiers, their 
parents, wives and children are held as hostages at a 
different place and provided for. When it is seen that the 
waters (dikes) can be breached, use the lin and fenwen to 
breach the outside (enemy) dikes, assisting them with rapid 
fire from the ‘revolving shooting machines’ (rotating 
crossbows) on the wall. 

Comment: Section 58.1 describes the first defence: the digging of channels and 
wells to drain the water away. In 58.2, the next one involves two kinds of specially 
designed craft which are sent out to breach the enemy dikes, their advance being 
covered by arrows fired from the wall. The youfang is unidentified, and a miao is 
possibly a spear. 



59 


Lost 



60 


Lost 



61 


Preparing Against Sudden Attack 
(.Bei Tu) 


61.1 In the wall, there should be one sally port ( tumen ) 
every 100 bu. For each sally port, there should be a kiln or 
furnace and a dou (tube for blowing the fire of the furnace 
- tuyere) which enters the gate for 4 or 5 chi. Above the 
gate, construct a tiled roof that does not allow water or 
heavy rain to enter the gate. An officer controls the 
blocking of the sally port using two cart wheels bound 
together with wood and smeared with mud on the upper 
surface. Suspend [this structure] within the sallyport, 
letting it be commensurate in width with the sally port. Let 
[the dou] enter the gate for 4 or 5 chi. Set up the kiln or 
furnace and place bellows beside the gate. Fill the furnace 
full with firewood and artemisia. When the enemy enters 



[the gate], drop the wheels and block it. Activate the 
bellows and create smoke. 

Comment: All that remains of the chapter on a sudden (or surprise) attack, if it is 
accepted that this is the meaning of tu. The technique is that the enemy forces are 
lured through gates in the wall (presumably the outer wall) and then their possible 
retreat is blocked by the structure, and smoke is released from the furnaces to 
incapacitate them. For sally port, Yates’s term ‘irruption gate’ might be preferable, 
given that the idea was to let the enemy burst in. On this type of attack, see Yates 
(T),pp. 461-3. 



62 


Preparing Against Tunnelling 
(.Bei Xue) 


62.1 Qin Zi bowed repeatedly and said: ‘May I ask about 
the men of old who were skilled in attack and tunnelled 
through the ground to enter [the city], placing posts which 
they set on fire in order to damage our wall. When the wall 
was damaged, what did those within the city do?’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘Are you asking about the defence 
against the tunnelling of earth? In preparing against 
tunnelling, erect a high tower within the wall to maintain a 
vigilant surveillance of the enemy. If the enemy brings 
about changes, for example builds up walls of an 
extraordinary amount of earth or causes the water in the 
moat to become unusually muddy, this indicates the 
tunnelling of earth. Urgently dig a channel within the wall 
and excavate tunnels to counter this. Every 5 bit dig a well 



within the wall, making it close enough to the wall. [If the 
wall is on] high ground, [the wells should be] 1 zhang 5 chi 
deep; if it is on low ground, they should reach to 3 chi 
below the water level and stop. Direct potters to make ying 
(jars, geophones) with a capacity of 40 dou or more, cover 
them tightly with thin rawhide and place them in the wells. 
Get those with sharp hearing to lie prostrate and listen in 
order to get detailed information about where the [enemy] 
tunnels are situated, then dig [counter-]tunnels to meet 
them.’ 

Comment: The essential components of a defence against tunnelling or mining are 
identified as above-ground surveillance using towers within the wall which give 
vantage points, and below-ground detection using wells and geophones to pick up 
sounds of enemy tunnelling. Counter-tunnels can then be dug. The method is 
detailed by Yates (SC), pp. 463-80. The idea was to tunnel under the wall, 
supporting the tunnel with posts until a sufficient length of the wall had been 
undermined. The posts were then set on fire so the tunnel, and with it the 
undermined section of wall, collapsed, allowing attackers to enter. 


62.2 Direct potters to make tiled pipes 2 chi 5 cun in 
length with a diameter of 6 wei (spans). Divide them in the 
centre, so that one half is facing upwards and one half 
facing downwards. Hie outside of the posts should be 
skilfully covered all around with mud. If what supports the 
posts doesn’t burn, the posts themselves don’t burn. 
Skilfully cover the joins in the drains with mud, so nothing 
can leak out. The two sides should both be like this as the 



tunnel advances. Place charcoal and chaff in them where 
the lower end reaches the ground, but not so as to fill them 
completely. Charcoal and chaff are placed throughout the 
length of the pipes and are distributed equally to the left 
and right. At the internal openings of the tunnels, there 
should be furnaces which are like kilns. Urey should 
contain seven or eight balls of artemisia. The left and right 
pipes should both be like this. The kilns use four bellows. 
When the tunnels meet, use well-sweeps to clear away the 
intervening earth and urgently stir up the bellows to provide 
smoke against the enemy. Be certain to issue clear orders 
to those attending the bellows not to leave the furnace 
openings. Make linked wooden planks of a height and width 
commensurate with that of the tunnel. Order the tunnellers 
with the planks to go forward together. Holes are cut in the 
planks to allow them to hold spears. Hrere are variations in 
the density and number to allow them to be used to save the 
pipes. When the tunnels meet, the planks are used to resist 
the enemy and the spears are used to protect the pipes. 
Don’t let the pipes become blocked. If the pipes are 
blocked, take up the planks and withdraw. If one blocked 
pipe is encountered, ream it out so smoke can pass. When 
smoke can pass, urgently work the bellows to produce 
smoke. If from within the tunnel, the sounds of tunnelling 
are heard to the left or right, the tunnel is immediately 



blocked at the front and not allowed to proceed further. If 
there is a joining with the enemy’s tunnel, the opening is 
blocked with brushwood and mud. In this way, the attack by 
tunnelling is defeated. 

Comment: The construction seems to be pipes built on either side of the defensive 
tunnels which are used to transmit noxious fumes, created by burning artemisia, into 
the enemy tunnels when a breakthrough is made. Wooden barriers with holes to 
accommodate spears are made to protect the tunnellers at the points of connection 
between defensive and offensive tunnels. 


62.3 When the enemy reaches our city, it becomes a matter 
of great urgency. In carefully preparing [against] the enemy 
if tunnels are thought to exist, respond to the enemy 
[tunnels] by urgently tunnelling. While [our] tunnels are not 
yet in place, we must be careful not to pursue [the enemy]. 

62.4 In general, to defeat an attack by tunnelling, excavate a 
[defensive] tunnel every 20 bu, each tunnel being 10 chi 
high and 10 chi wide. As the tunnel advances forward, there 
should be a fall of 3 chi for every 1 bu. Every 10 bu of 
advancement, excavate transverse tunnels ( yongxue ) to the 
left and right, the height and width of each one being 10 
chi. 

62.5 Bury two ying so that the depth of the mouths of the 
ying is level with the ground within the wall. Use joined 
planks to cover each ying. Then, lying prostrate, listen [to 



them]. Every 5 bit have one well. For each tunnel, use tong 
(wood) or pine to make doors. Within the doors, place two 
caltrops, making the length of each equal to that of the 
doors. Tire doors should have [iron] rings. All around the 
doors of the tunnel, there should be a wall of stones 7 chi 
high. Add a parapet above it. Do not make steps but use a 
suspended ladder to go up or down, out or in. Prepare a 
furnace and bellows, the bellows being made of ox-hide. 
For the furnace have two bellows. Use well-sweeps 
weighing 100 jin with the very smallest not less than 40 
jin. Use burning charcoal to put into the furnace, fill it and 
cover it so as not to allow smoke to escape. If the enemy is 
rapidly approaching our tunnel and their tunnel is higher or 
lower than ours so it does not enter our tunnel, then 
excavate at an incline and seek to connect with it. 

Comment: There is uncertainty about the weights given as jin: do they refer to the 
well-sweeps (as above), or to the fuel, as Yates (T) thinks. 


62.6 When there is a confrontation with the enemy in the 
tunnel, in all cases oppose [them] but don’t pursue [them]. 
There should be alternation between fighting and feigning 
defeat to draw the enemy into one’s own tunnel. Then await 
the burning in the furnaces while hiding in concealed side 
tunnels like rats in their holes. Make a windowwith a 
locking cover through which the comings and goings within 



can be observed. On the wall outside each tunnel have a 
dog. When the dog barks, it is an indication that there are 
people. 

62.7 Cut artemisia and firewood, [preparing bundles] 1 chi 
in length. Place them in the kilns or furnaces. First, make a 
pile of stones to screen off the kiln, [and then,] where it 
faces the tunnel, have joined planks. 

62.8 Dig wells close enough to the wall[, having] one every 
3 zhang. Survey the terrain outside [the wall] to establish 
where to place the wells, taking care not to make a mistake. 
If the wall is low and the tunnel high, it is difficult to detect 
the [enemy] tunnels. Within the wall, dig three or four 
wells, and inside each well place newly made ying so it is 
possible to lie prostrate and listen to them, thus gaining a 
detailed knowledge of where the [enemy] tunnels are 
situated. Make [counter-]tunnels to meet them. If the 
tunnels do, in fact, meet, prepare well-sweeps which must 
have strong timber for the handles. Use sharp axes to make 
them. Give the order for three strong men to use the well- 
sweeps to rush against the enemy and pour in more than 10 
dan of foul material. 

62.9 Quickly fill the centre of the furnace with brushwood 
and place seven or eight balls of artemisia on top. Use a 



basin to cover the mouth of the furnace, so as not to let the 
smoke leak out above. Bring the bellows next to the mouth 
and rapidly activate them. 

62.10 Make a wen from cart wheels. Make one bundle of 
firewood, using a hempen rope steeped in mud to bind it 
around the middle. Suspend an iron chain directly facing 
the mouth of the enemy tunnel. Hie iron chain should be 3 
zhang long with one end having a ring and the other end a 
hook. 

Comment: There is some doubt about what a wen was: see also 52.7 and 62.12. 
Yates (SC) says: ‘Unfortunately, it is not possible to specify the nature of the wen , 
but it may have been some kind of giant pulley or winch’ (p. 471). 


62.11 [Make] ‘rat holes’ ( shuxue ) 7 chi 5 cun high with a 
width between the pillars on either side equal to 7 chi. [On 
the side walls,] have one pillar every 2 chi with a foundation 
stone placed beneath each pillar. Every two pillars should 
have a transverse piece of timber beneath them which 
connects them. The space under the timber should be filled 
with earth to support it. The circumference of each pillar 
should be 2'A wei. The supporting earth must be packed 
firmly, while the pillars themselves should not 
interconnect. 


62.12 For every tunnel have two kilns and have tiles 
covering the doors of the tunnels. Have zhili (assistants) 
and sheren (assistants), one of each. Water must be placed 
[there]. Block up the doors of the tunnels with a pair of 
carriage wheels, making a wen which is coated with mud on 
its upper surface. Tire size of these is determined by the 
height and width of the tunnel. Order that they be placed 4 
or 5 chi into the tunnel and secured with rope. When the 
enemy is engaged in the tunnel, turn [the pulleys] and lower 
the wen to obstruct [the enemy], and light the kilns. Put 
three balls of artemisia into the kilns. Then let the enemy 
rush forward and enter the tunnel. From a concealed 
position to one side, work the bellows and don’t leave the 
post. Tire lances used in the tunnels are made of iron and 
are 4 Zi chi long. There are [also] large [weapons] like iron 
battleaxes, as well as two kinds of lance with sharpened 
blades. After the tunnel has progressed 1 chi from its 
opening, the digging should incline downwards so the 
tunnel descends down towards the centre of the earth. Use 
lances that are 7 chi long. In the tunnel have encircling 
ropes for going up and down, two per tunnel. 

Comment: There is ag^in uncertainty about what a wen is - i.e. whether it is the 
same as in 62.10 or the luwen used for blocking tunnels (Yates (T)). 



62.13 Dig wells below the wall. Wait until the well is about 
to break through. Then, standing on a wooden plank, dig out 
one side. When that is complete, dig out the other side. 
Have two well-sweeps. At the sides, bury their posts and 
have hooks near the two ends. In all, have fifty people 
digging the tunnel with equal numbers of men and women. 
In the tunnel have implements for moving the earth, 
including six baskets, bound around the bottom with 
hempen rope, that can lift out the earth for distribution 
[around the opening of the tunnel]. When the tunnel is 
completed, seven men are left to defend it. Within the 
rampart create one large room within which the tunnelling 
equipment can be stored. 

Comment: Some editors divide 62.13 into the method of digging wells; the method 
of using well-sweeps; the numbers of people used; and the method of transporting 
earth when digging tunnels and what to do when the tunnel is complete. 


62.14 To make it difficult [for the enemy] to tunnel, collect 
up the wood and bricks scattered on the sides of the moat. 
[Inside the wall,] dig a trench as deep as the water level. To 
make it difficult for tunnels near at hand, prepare iron axes. 
An axe and its handle should be 4 chi long. Make enough 
for requirements. When the enemy has tunnels, you should 
also have tunnels to oppose them. 

Comment: It is not clear whether 62.14 is about making things difficult for enemy 
tunnellers (as above), or dealing with situations where it is difficult to dig defensive 



tunnels (Yates (T)). 


62.15 Make iron hooks 4 chi long - enough to meet 
requirements - and when the tunnels communicate, use 
them to hook the enemy tunnellers. Make short spears, 
short halberds, short crossbows and short arrows - enough 
to meet requirements - and when the tunnels communicate, 
use them for the fighting. For hacking the enemy, use a 
weapon with a bronze blade 5 chi in length. Make a hole in 
the head to fit a wooden handle, and above the place where 
the hand grips the handle have a carved indentation. Use this 
to oppose the enemy tunnellers. 

62.16 Prepare and have ying (geophones) with a capacity 
of 30 clou or more. Bury them in the tunnels, [three] every 
zhang, to listen for the sounds of [enemy] tunnelling. 

62.17 Make tunnels with a height of 8 chi and a width of 8 
chi. Set up good supporting pillars and coat the outer 
surfaces of these with mud. Prepare furnaces and ox-hide 
bellows as well as pipes [for the transmission of smoke]. 
Each tunnel should have two pipes. Add a supply of rapidly 
combustible material such as artemisia, and when the 
tunnels connect, use this to provide smoke [against the 
enemy]. 



62.18 Make axes with metal blades and handles 3 chi in 
length. Provide four for each tunnel. Make baskets (lei), 
forty per tunnel, and hoes (shu), four per tunnel. Make axes 
of different kinds, saws, chisels and large hoes, sufficient 
for requirements. Make iron rails, four per tunnel. 

62.19 Make medium-sized hi (shields) IOV 2 chi high and 4 
chi wide. Make large lu for placing across the tunnels. 

Have a large quantity of hemp stalks sufficient to provide 
illumination for the tunnels. 

62.20 Have a large quantity of vinegar so that when the 
enemy creates smoke, it can be used to relieve the eyes. 
Once the eyes are relieved, attention can again be directed 
to digging out the tunnel. Use basins to hold the vinegar and 
place these within the tunnels. [They should be] large basins 
not less than 4 doit [incapacity]. When there is smoke, 
bring the eyes near to the upper surface of the vinegar, 
using it to protect the eyes. 

Comment: On the use of vinegar to protect the eyes, Yates (SC) remarks: ‘Just 
how effective this procedure was against the thick clouds of highly irritating 
artemisia smoke in the deep and narrow tunnel is unclear, for no descriptions of its 
use in actual battle have come down to us’ (p. 469). 


63 


Preparing Against the ‘Ant Approach’ 
(Massed Infantry Assault) 

(Bei Yifu) 


63.1 Qin Zi bowed repeatedly and said: ‘May I ask about 
the situation where the enemy shows superior strength, 
approaches and climbs the wall, with orders for those who 
lag behind in the scaling to be punished. They chisel into 
the wall to create steps and excavate the wall to make 
shelters. Those at the front don’t stop climbing while those 
behind maintain a rapid fire of arrows. What can be done 
about this?’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘Are you asking about defence 
against the ant approach? In launching an ant approach, the 
general is being very aggressive. Tire defenders should 
make use of movable lin (approaches) to fire on the 
attackers, using either mechanical firing devices or hand- 



drawn bows, boiling water to pour down on them, flaming 
screens to release over them, and sand and stones to rain 
down on them. In this way, attack by the ant approach can be 
defeated.’ 

63.2 In preparing for the ant approach, make ‘hanging 
spleens’ ( xuanpi ) using wooden planks 2 cun thick. The 
width at the front and back should be 3 chi and at the sides 
5 chi. The height should be 5 chi. To lower them, construct 
pulleys, the wheels of which should have a diameter of 1 
chi 6 cun. Order one man to take hold of a lance 2 zhang 4 
chi long and sharp at both ends, and take up position in the 
hanging spleen. An iron chain is attached to the upper 
horizontal timber of the hanging spleen and this is 
suspended from the pulley above. Order four strong men to 
lower and raise it and not to leave [their posts]. Set up 
hanging spleens at intervals of approximately 20 hu, but 
when the attacking forces are at hand, reduce this to 6 hu. 

Comment: The majority treat this as a discrete section. It is about a single topic, 
the ‘hanging spleen’, which appears to have been a wooden box, presumably slatted 
and containing one soldier, which was lowered over the side of the wall so the 
enclosed warrior could use his double-ended lance to strike at enemy soldiers scaling 
the wall - see Yates (SC), p. 482. 


63.3 Make rope-bound da (screens) that are 1 zhang 2 chi 
in both width and length and have a horizontal timber above. 



Use thick hempen rope to bind them up and smear them 
with a covering of mud. Use an iron chain hooked on to 
both ends to suspend them. When the enemy makes an ant 
approach to the wall, set fire to the screens and drop them 
over the enemy. Linked flails, sand and fire all stop them. 
Take two cart wheels and bind them to a large piece of 
wood, the distance between the axle-shafts being wide, and 
oppose them. Both ends of the large piece of wood are 
sharpened, and both the wood and the wheels are 
everywhere coated with mud. The space between is filled 
with twigs of elm or hemp, while at the sides there are 
brambles. This [apparatus] is called a ‘fire-thrower ’ 

( huozu ). It is also called a ‘heat transferrer ' (zhuantang), 
and is placed facing the [enemy] troops. If the enemy scales 
[the wall], set fire to the heat transferrer, cut its ropes and 
let it fall. [Then] give the order for brave warriors to follow 
it and rout the enemy, taking the heat transferrer as a 
forerunner to the brave warriors. Those on the wall should 
immediately repair the damage to the wall. 

Comment: Describes the hanging or fire screens and what Yates (T) has termed 
‘fire-throwers’ or ‘heat transferrers’. 


63.4 Below the wall put an adequate number of sharpened 
wooden stakes, each 5 chi long and greater than l A wei 
(span) in circumference, all sharp at the ends. Make five 



rows with a distance between the rows of 3 chi and bury 
them to a depth of 3 chi set upright like dog’s teeth. 

Prepare linked maces 5 chi in length and roughened over 1 
cun. Prepare flails 2 chi in length and 6 cun in 
circumference. The length of the rope should be 2 chi. 
Prepare hammers with handles 6 chi long and a head that is 
1 chi 5 cun long. Prepare axes with handles 6 chi long; the 
blades must be sharp. 

63.5 Prepare screens 1 zhang 2 chi wide and 1 zhang 6 chi 
long and suspend them by an anterior cross-member which 
projects 4 chi. The place of connection at either end must 
overhang by 1 chi to the right and left, but don’t let it be 
unequal like fish scales. Alarge rope 2 zhang 6 chi long is 
attached to the centre of the posterior cross-member. Tire 
screen is exposed in an unconfined place and filled with 
pieces of wood which are kept dry. The screen should have 
a framework to allow the air to circulate above and below. 

Comment: Returns to the topic of (fire) screens, starting with the same basic 
dimensions as in 63.3. 


63.6 Where the parapet is damaged and thought likely to 
collapse, first bury pieces of wood, one every 10 chi. If the 
parapet does collapse, cut pieces of wood and attach cross¬ 
pieces onto the well-buried posts. Tire attached pieces 
should be 8 chi long, 7 cun wide and have a diameter of 1 



chi. They should be securely attached and then lowered. 
Nail them and cut them. 


63.7 [On the wall, set up] wooden towers with piles of 
stones, and hang screens on the inside of the pillars but not 
on the outside. 

63.8 Make an oak palisade buried to a depth of 4 chi and 
with a height of 10 zhang. [In it] long and short timbers are 
mixed together. Tire upper ends are sharpened and the outer 
surface thickly covered with mud. 

Comment: There is some doubt about the opening two characters: Yates (T) 
identifies this as a ‘wattle fence’. Suffice it to say that it is some form of wooden 
barrier. 


63.9 On the wall, have retractable walkways and suspended 
screens. At the corners, make towers. Tire towers must be 
of two storeys. Every 5 bu there should be a pile of earth, 
not less than twenty baskets. At a distance of 3 chi below 
the parapets excavate holes at intervals of 10 chi and widest 
towards the exterior. (With respect to changing direction 
on the wall, quickly prepare the moving towers, sha, pools 
of water and pitchers of hide. If the enemy scales the wall 
and those soldiers undertaking the attack are unable to 
effect a timely retreat and so leave behind military 



equipment, it should be dealt with according to military 
conventions. Also there should be use of fire and smoke.) 

Comment: On sha, see 56.4. The text for the sentences in parentheses is very 
uncertain; the translation given is therefore tentative. 


63.10 In general, among the methods of repelling an ant 
approach, there is the setting-up of bo (barriers) outside 
the wall at a distance of 10 chi from it. Abo should be 10 
chi thick. The method for cutting down [timber for] a bo is 
to take everything large or small and cut it at the root, then 
cut it to 10 chi lengths. Tire pieces are gathered together 
and buried deeply in the ground to create a strong 
construction that cannot be pulled up. 

63.11 Every 20 bu, there should be one sha with an internal 
partition 10 chi thick. A sha has two gates, [each] being 5 
chi wide. A small part of the gate timbers is buried but not 
strongly, allowing them to be easily pulled up. Opposite the 
gates of the barrier (bo), set up a palisade (ju). 

Comment: Compare 56.4. 

63.12 Have hanging fires with a hook every 4 chi. Have one 
furnace every 5 bu. By the doors of the furnaces have 
braziers with charcoal. Tire enemy soldiers are allowed to 
enter fully, upon which smoke and fire are applied to the 
gates with hanging fires to follow. Send out carriers and set 



them up, their width being equivalent to that of the enemy 
line. Between two carriers, there should be one fire. When 
everything is set up, the sound of the drum is awaited and 
upon its occurrence, the fires are lit and thrown down all 
together. If the enemy should avoid the fire and attack 
again, the hanging fires are again hurled down, bringing the 
enemy great distress. When the enemy army is forced to 
withdraw, give the order for our crack troops on all sides to 
go forth from the sally ports and attack the fleeing army. 
Give the order to these brave men and their general all to 
go forth when they hear the drum sound on the wall and to 
return when they hear the drum sound again. As before, 
when the soldiers and general go forth, set up a diversion. 

In the middle of the night, make a clamour of drums from 
all sides on the walls. This must create doubt in the hearts 
of the enemy, and you will rout their army and kill the 
general. Put on white garments as clothes and communicate 
with each other by calls. 

Comment: Compare 56.4 and 56.5. 



64 


Lost 



65 


Lost 



66 


Lost 



67 


Lost 



68 


Sacrifices for Meeting Enemies 
(YingDi Ci ) 


68.1 When enemies come from the east, meet them at the 
eastern altar. lire altar should be 8 chi high and the depth of 
the hall 8 chi. Eight people of eighty years should lead the 
sacrifice to a green pennant and eight likenesses of a green 
god 8 chi high. There should be eight crossbows that fire 
eight arrows, then stop. lire general’s clothing must be 
green and the sacrificial creature the chicken. When 
enemies come from the south, meet them at the southern 
altar. lire altar should be 7 chi high and the depth of the hall 
7 chi. Seven people of seventy years should lead the 
sacrifice to a red pennant and seven likenesses of a red god 
7 chi high. There should be seven crossbows that fire seven 
arrows, then stop. The general’s clothing must be red and 
the sacrificial creature the dog. When enemies come from 



the west, meet them at the western altar. The altar should be 
9 chi high and the depth of the hall 9 chi. Nine people of 
ninety years should lead the sacrifice to a white pennant 
and nine likenesses of a white god 9 chi high. There should 
be nine crossbows that fire nine arrows, then stop. Tire 
general’s clothing must be plain (white) and the sacrificial 
creature the sheep. When enemies come from the north, 
meet them at the northern altar. Tire altar should be 6 chi 
high and the depth of the hall 6 chi. Six people of sixty 
years should lead the sacrifice to a black pennant and six 
likenesses of a black god 6 chi high. There should be six 
crossbows that fire six arrows, then stop. The general’s 
clothing must be black and the sacrificial creature the pig. 
From all the large temples outside the city, priests and 
shamans are sent to say prayers and make the sacrificial 
offerings. 

68.2 In general, with the method of ‘watching the vapours’ 

(wang qi), there is a dajiang vapour, there is axiaojiang 
vapour; there is a ‘going’ vapour, and there is a ‘coming’ 
vapour. There is a ‘success’ vapour and there is a ‘failure’ 
vapour. If these things are clearly understood, it is possible 
to know beforehand whether there will be victory or defeat, 
and good fortune or bad fortune. Bring forward those who 
are skilled in wizardry, medicine and divination, provide 



them with the necessary drugs and arrange good living 
conditions. Hie quarters for the shamans must be close to 
the altars for the gods of the soil and they must offer 
respect to the gods. The activities of the shamans and 
diviners are reported to the Defender, and he is the only 
one to know the results of ‘watching the vapours’. If they 
should come and go creating rumours, startling and 
terrifying officials and people, thoroughly and closely 
investigate them and put them to death, this being an 
unpardonable crime. The lodgings for those involved in 
‘watching the vapours’ must be close to the defence 
headquarters. In gathering worthy high officials as well as 
workmen with particular skills, rank them. In the case of 
butchers and winemakers, set up kitchens and give them 
duties, [then] rank them. 

Comment: An alternative translation of wang qi is ‘watchingthe ether’. It may 
perhaps be equated with the modern qixiang tai (me-teorological observation). 


68.3 In general, in defending the city, there should be 
township preceptors ( xianshi ) who have certain duties 
[such as] surveying the fortifications, inspecting ditches 
and dikes, blocking up roads beyond the wall and 
maintaining the wall itself. Tire hundred officials provide 
materials. Tire hundred workmen carry out their various 
duties. Tire commander ( sima ) oversees the conditions of 



the wall and the troops. In setting up the defence of the 
gate, two men are assigned to manage the right side and two 
men the left side. Four men are in charge of [opening and] 
closing the gate. One hundred armoured soldiers sit [by the 
gate] in defence. On the wall, every 1 bu have an armoured 
soldier and a halberdier with three people to assist them. 
Every 5 bu have a squad leader, every 10 bu a file leader 
and every 100 bu a leader of one hundred (centurion). To 
the sides have grand marshals ( dashuai ) and in the middle 
have a general-in-chief ( dajiang ). All these leaders have 
their particular responsibilities. Against the wall there 
should be flights of steps with one person to manage their 
defence. Military documents are moved to a conveniently 
central place where those that are urgent can be picked out 
and made known. All the officers have their duties. 

Comment: This section has three components: the duties of the xianshi and the 
sima, for which the titles are applicable to the Zhou period (Hucker 2534 and 5713, 
respectively); the distribution and grouping of troops on the wall; and the handling 
of documents. 


68.4 Beyond the wall, as far as arrows can reach, anything 
resembling a wall should be destroyed, so there is no way 
for the enemy to find shelter. Within a radius of 30 li, all 
firewood, twigs and wood generally is brought within [the 
wall]. With animals such as dogs, pigs, sucking pigs and 
chickens whose flesh is eaten, the bones are collected to 



make a broth which is used to help the sick recover their 
health. Within the wall, firewood, twigs, huts and houses as 
far as an arrow can travel are all covered with mud. The 
order is given that in the evening dogs should be tied up and 
horses tethered. The tethering must be secure. In the still 
of the night, when the drum is heard, there should be a great 
shout. This is a way to dampen the enemy’s spirits and to 
strengthen the people’s resolve. Thus, if there are timely 
shouts, the people are not fearful. 

68.5 Prior to the conflict, the prayer-makers and 
chroniclers should make an announcement to the four 
directions, the mountains and rivers, and the altars of soil 
and grain. Then they should withdraw. Tire duke, dressed in 
plain garments, should offer a pledge in the ancestral 
temple, saying: ‘Such people do not act in accord with the 
Way. They do not cultivate yi (right conduct and duty) or 
virtue. Urey rely only on strength and arrogance, saying: 
“We plan to destroy your altars of soil and grain. We will 
wipe out your people.” I urge all of you to work day and 
night, and labour on my behalf. With singleness of purpose, 
we can strive together, risking our lives in defence [of our 
city].’ Having made the declaration, the duke then 
withdraws to eat, resting within the central ancestral temple 
on the right-hand side. Tire prayer-makers and chroniclers 



rest at the altar of soil. When the one hundred officials are 
all in attendance, the drum is raised in the doorway, while 
to the right a banner is placed and to the left a standard, one 
at each corner; the names of the commanders are written 
on the streamers. Three arrows are released to announce 
[an impending] victory. Tire five weapons are prepared. 

Then [the troops] assemble below the drum and await the 
command. Tire duke ascends [the temple platform] and 
surveys the space beyond [the wall]. Then he orders the 
drum [to be sounded] and after a few moments the banners 
are raised. Tire commander fires a stream of arrows from 
the doorway to the right. Aspear is raised three times. Then 
all take up their bows and fire. Tire commander first fires a 
flaming arrow from the doorway to the left, then all follow 
with wood and stones. Tire prayer-makers, chroniclers and 
ancestral intendant make an announcement at the altar of 
soil and cover the sacrificial vessel. 

Comment: A detailed discussion of these procedures is found in Yates (T), pp. 
373-6. 



69 


Flags and Pennons 
(Qi Zhi) 


69.1 Methods of defending a city: for wood, make a green 
flag. For fire, make a red flag. For firewood and fuel, make 
a yellow flag. For stones, make a white flag. For water, 
make a black flag. For food, make a mushroom flag. For 
‘dare-to-die’ soldiers, make a hawk flag. For vigorous 
soldiers, make a tiger flag. For many soldiers, make a flag 
of paired hares. For boys under fourteen, make a youth flag. 
For women, make a sisters flag. For crossbows, make a dog 
flag. For halberds, make a banner flag. For swords and 
shields, make a feathers flag. For carts, make a dragon flag. 
For mounts, make a bird flag. In general, if something is 
sought for which a flag is not [listed] in the book, create a 
flag based on the form or name [of what is needed]. When a 
flag is raised on the wall, the officials responsible provide 



whatever materials or things are needed; when there is 
enough, the flag is lowered. 

Comment: The first four characters (shou cheng zhifa) are taken as a heading. 
Yates (T) suggests that shu (book) indicates that ‘the Mohists carried copies of 
these chapters when they were preparing their tasks of defence’. 


69.2 General methods of defending a city: have stores of 
stones; have stores of fuel and firewood; have stores of 
rushes; have stores of reeds; have stores of wood; have 
stores of charcoal; have stores of sand; have stores of pine 
and cypress; have stores of fleabane and artemisia; have 
stores of hemp and oil; have stores of bronze and iron; have 
stores of rice and millet. Wells and furnaces should have 
their locations. Important hostages should have places to 
dwell. lire five weapons should each have a flag. Tallies 
should each have two halves. Rules and orders should each 
be [clearly] established. The gradations of light (trivial) and 
heavy (important) should each have their basis. Those 
responsible for the inspection of roads should each have 
designated areas. 

69.3 For each post captain have pennons with staffs of 2 
zhang 5 chi in length and material (silk) 1 zhang 5 chi long 
and half a strip wide, six in all. When the enemy attack 
reaches the outer side of the moat, those on the wall facing 
the enemy should strike the drum three times and raise one 



pennon. When the enemy is in the water of the moat, they 
should strike the drum four times and raise two pennons. 
When the enemy reaches the protecting palisade, they 
should strike the drum five times and raise three pennons. 
When the enemy reaches the subsidiary wall, they should 
strike the drum six times and raise four pennons. When the 
enemy reaches the parapets, they should strike the drum 
seven times and raise five pennons. When the enemy 
reaches the main wall, they should strike the drum eight 
times and raise six pennons. When the enemy troops are 
halfway up in their ascent of the wall, they should strike the 
drum continuously. During the night, fires take the place of 
pennons but the numbers remain the same. When the 
enemy is retreating, pennons are used in the same sequence 
as for the advance but without the drum. 

Comment: The provision of pennons or flags to the officers in charge of ting or 
posts along the wall (see 52.18), and their use in conjunction with drums to signal 
the stages of the enemy’s advance or retreat. 


69.4 For the general on the wall, there is a crimson flag 50 
chi long. For the generals in charge of the gates on the four 
sides, [the flag] is 40 chi long. [There is then a progressive 
decrease according to rank,] the next being 30 chi, the one 
after that 25 chi, then 20 chi, then 15 chi; there is nothing 
less than 15 chi. 



Comment: Yates’s version (T) has the first general as the general of the city, the 
flag is not crimson and si (four) is retained with the measurement {45 chi ) referring 
to the staff. 


69.5 Hie officers on the wall [have an insignia] placed on 
their backs, the common soldiers on their heads, and the 
officers and soldiers below the wall on their shoulders. For 
the army on the left, it is on the left shoulder. For the army 
on the right, it is on the right shoulder. For the army in the 
middle, it is placed on the chest. Hie left and right armies 
each have one drum, while the middle army has three. Hie 
number of strikings of the drum ranges from three to ten. 
All those officers who have drums must be careful with 
respect to the number [of strikings] of their responses. If 
the drums respond when they should not respond or do not 
respond when they should respond, the person in charge is 
put to death. 

69.6 Hie road [on the wall] should be 30 bu wide with steps 
to ascend and descend. On both sides of these, there should 
be wells with iron vessels [for water]. On the outer side of 
the road, make one screening wall every 30 bu. Make these 
round and 1 zhang high. Make latrines for the people; the 
walls of the latrines should be 12 chi or more high. Where 
streets and lanes join the road, there must be gates with two 
men to guard them. Hiose without the correct 



identification don’t pass. Those who don’t comply with 
orders are executed. 

69.7 On the wall, officers and soldiers, men and women, 
should all wear distinguishing clothes and emblems, so 
men and women can be differentiated. 

69.8 [In the case of] all those who defend the shengge 
(fences) and are able to beat back three advances by the 
enemy, the Defender gives an order summoning them and 
bestows food on them in front [of others], provides them 
with a large flag and gives them control over a town of one 
hundred households, or other materials and things. A flag to 
establish their official status lets everyone clearly know 
this. This is called a mouzi flag. The internal width of a 
shengge is 25 bu and the external width is 10 bu. Its length 
is determined on the basis of the local topography. 

69.9 In training troops, starting from the centre, teach 
those to the front and back, right and left [in sequence], so 
those who are tired can rest [in rotation]. 


Comment: In Yates’s (T) interpretation, 69.9 applies to troops training within a 
shengge as a kind of fenced enclosure. 


70 


Orders and Commands 
(Hao Ling ) 


70.1 The way of bringing peace to a state starts from the 
proper use of the land. If the land is properly used, 
achievement can be completed. If the land is not properly 
used, then regardless of labour, there is no achievement. 
People are also like this. If prior preparations are not made 
with respect to [military] equipment, there is no way to 
bring peace to those who must defend the city. If officers, 
soldiers and ordinary people are numerous but are not of 
one mind, the responsibility invariably lies with their 
leaders. In all cases, the carrying out of rewards and 
punishments and the bringing about of order must come 
from the king or duke. [He] must frequently send people to 
reward those who defend the frontiers and mountain passes 
and those who toil in guarding against barbarian invasion. 



He must ascertain whether the defensive leaders’ materiel 
is more than enough or not enough, whether the topography 
is suitable for frontier defence and whether their 
equipment and preparations are always adequate (many). If 
in the border districts and regions, they see that trees and 
wood are lacking, there is little to use. If the fields are not 
opened up, there is little to eat. If there are no large houses 
with grass roofs, there will be little to use for burning. 

Comment: Yates (T) reads the opening sentence as speaking of ‘a metaphysical 
relationship between the Tao and Earth’, referring to the Guanzi 24 (W. Allyn 
Rickett, Kuan-tzu (Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 1965), p. 115). I have 
followed a more prosaic line. 


70.2 Make an inner battlement and an inner footbridge and 
place prepared utensils on top of them. Officers, soldiers 
and servants are all billeted inside the road on the wall, in 
each case appropriately divided according to their place of 
defence. Two servants are assigned to every ten men with 
one person to hold the tallies. Hris person is called the 
‘servant officer’ and is responsible for guarding every gate. 
All those who guard the gates and those responsible for the 
prohibitions of defence should not let anyone linger or 
remain beside the gates. Hrose who do not follow orders 
are put to death. Further, when the enemy reaches [a city 
with] a 1,000 zhang wall, they must be met at the outer 
wall, this being to the defender’s benefit. In the case of a 



city with a wall less than 1,000 zhang , do not go to meet 
them but look at the deployment of the enemy forces and 
their number, and [then] meet them. This is the principal 
point of defending a city wall. For any situation not covered 
in this, in all cases look at it in the light of basic principles 
and human affairs. 

Comment: Yates (T) divides this section into three fragments, with the final one 
suggesting ‘that there were two subsections, as yet undiscovered in the extant text 
or now lost, called “Mental Techniques” and “Human Affairs” The three 
characters lu, zhan and duan are used from here on in chapter 70 to indicate 
punishment, and I have understood them as interchangeable and meaning ‘putting to 
death’ or ‘executing’, although this does seem to be a particularly harsh penalty for 
some of the offences described and also raises concerns about loss of manpower. 

70.3 In general, in guarding a city, the best option is to 
inflict damage on the enemy quickly, but the advantage of 
waiting until relief arrives should also be recognized in 
defence. Certainly, if these things can be done, then the 
defence can be successful. 

Comment: There is some doubt in the second part of the first sentence about 
where bu (a negative) should be placed, and whether it should be emended to bi 
(must, necessary). In terms of meaning, the issue is whether waiting for relief is a 
desirable option or should be avoided. 


70.4 In the methods of defence of a city, if the enemy is 
100 li or more away, the general in command issues an 
order urgently summoning the [members of] the five 


offices and the leaders of a hundred men, as well as the 
kindred of rich men and important families to reside in 
official dwellings. He orders trustworthy men to defend 
and guard them for reasons of caution about secrecy. 

70.5 When the enemy makes an ‘ant approach’ (massed 
infantry assault) against the city, the defending general 
must have not less than 300 men in his camp, while the 
generals of the four sides and the four gates must choose 
officers of meritorious service and followers prepared to 
serve to the death, these numbering 100 men [for each 
general]. Tire gate generals collectively defend the other 
gates. Above the gates high towers should be built and 
skilled archers dispatched to them to take up positions. Tire 
outer battlements and the earthen wall should have one man 
for defence. Send the sons of important houses. Every 50 
bu, have one tower. 

70.6 On the basis of the neighbourhoods within the city, 
eight divisions (wards) are created with one officer for 
each division. Each officer has four assistants with whom 
to patrol the streets within the neighbourhood. Old and 
young people in the neighbourhoods don’t take part in the 
actual business of defence, or in the planning. Four 
divisions are made in a neighbourhood, with one leader for 



each division to look into comings and goings that are at 
inappropriate times or are for other strange or nefarious 
purposes. Officers from the four assistants upwards who 
have defensive responsibilities must be given reliable 
tallies by the commander-in-chief (Great General), and 
when he sends them out on defensive business, they should 
carry these reliable tallies. In the case of these tallies not 
corresponding or calls not eliciting a matching response, 
military officers from leaders of a hundred men upwards at 
once stop them and let the commander-in-chief hear of it. 
Those who should stop them but don’t and assistants to the 
officers who let them go are all put to death. In the case of 
all those who commit a crime meriting the death penalty or 
more, all their parents, wives, children and siblings are 
implicated. 

70.7 Among the adult men who are defenders on the wall, 
in a file of ten, six should have crossbows and four should 
have other weapons. In the case of adult women and the old 
and young, there should be one spear for each person. 

70.8 If an urgent situation suddenly arises, the centre army 
rapidly strikes the drum three times. Then all people must 
refrain from moving about along the road on the wall and in 
the lanes and streets in the neighbourhoods. Those who do 



move about are put to death. When [men] and women go 
towards the main army, the order is given to those moving 
for men to walk on the left and women to walk on the right, 
and for them not to walk together. [In this way,] all go to 
their defensive [positions]. Anyone who does not follow 
the order is put to death. Those who leave their defensive 
positions have their corpses displayed for three days - this 
being used as a warning against treachery. The leaders of 
the neighbourhoods and all those with defensive 
responsibilities live [adjacent to] the neighbourhood gates. 
Hie leader personally opens the gate to admit an officer. 

He then accompanies him in inspecting the areas of 
defensive responsibility of the elders right up to the narrow 
lanes and secluded places where no one lives. 

Comment: There are three components: the movement of people after the drum 
has sounded to declare an emergency situation; the taking up of defensive positions 
and punishment for leaving these positions; and the surveillance of the g^tes and 
other areas within the wall. 


70.9 What treacherous people plan is to collaborate [with 
the enemy] outside. It is a crime [that warrants] pulling 
apart by chariots. Leaders and elders, as well as officers in 
charge of divisions, who fail [to apprehend such people] are 
all put to death. If they do apprehend them, they are free of 
guilt and are also rewarded with gold [to the amount of] 2 yi 
(i.e. 40 taels) per person. Tire commander-in-chief sends 



trustworthy men to walk around the defensive areas. On 
long nights, there are five tours of inspection and on short 
nights, there are three tours of inspection. Also, the 
officers on the four sides all personally walk around their 
defensive areas like the walking around of the commander- 
in-chief. Those who do not comply with the order are 
executed. 

70.10 Protective screens must be made for all furnaces. 
Chimneys should be high and extend 4 chi above the 
building. Care must be taken not to lose [control of] a fire. 
Those who lose [control of] a fire are put to death. Those 
who deliberately lose [control of] a fire to create disorder 
are pulled apart by chariots. Five-man squads that do not 
apprehend [such people] are put to death. If they do 
apprehend [them], they are free from blame. Those who go 
to put out the fire dare not make a noise or clamour, while 
those who leave their defensive posts and obstruct the 
laneways [being used] for fire relief are put to death. The 
leaders, as well as elders and officers, who have defensive 
responsibilities for the division containing these laneways 
all involve themselves inputting the fire out. Tire officer 
for the division quickly orders men to inform the 
commander-in-chief. Tire commander-in-chief sends 
trustworthy men from the left and right to put out the fire. 



Division officers who fail to report it are put to death. In all 
cases, women who commit crimes warranting the death 
penalty, as well as those who lose [control of] a fire, even if 
they cause no harm, right up to those who use fires to bring 
about disorder, are all treated according to the law. These 
are important prohibitions for a besieged city. 

Comment: The topic is fire control, the penalties for letting a fire get out of control 
and for deliberately setting a fire. 


70.11 (Important prohibitions for a besieged city:) When 
the enemy suddenly arrives, strict orders are given to 
officers and people that none must dare to make a noise or 
clamour, to gather in groups of three, to walk together, to 
watch each other, to sit silently weeping and allowing tears 
to flow, to raise their hands and question each other, to 
point at each other, to call to each other, to signal to each 
other, to follow each other’s footsteps, to throw things at 
each other, to strike each other, to touch each other’s 
persons or clothing, to blame and refute, to argue and talk, 
or to watch the enemy’s actions and movements without 
orders [to do so]. [Those who do these things] are put to 
death. If a five-man squad does not apprehend them, they 
are put to death. If they do apprehend them, they are free 
from blame. If a five-man squad [member] scales the wall 
and goes over to the enemy and [the other members] of the 



squad don’t apprehend him, they are put to death. If the 
leader of a hundred men goes over to the enemy, the 
regimental leader is put to death. If the regimental leader 
goes over to the enemy, the regimental general is put to 
death. In the case of those defecting to the enemy, parents, 
wives, children and siblings are all torn apart by chariots. 
Those who report on these matters before the event are 
free from blame. Those who leave their positions at the 
time of facing the enemy are put to death. Five-man squads 
that do not apprehend them are put to death. Those that do 
apprehend them are absolved from blame. 

Comment: The punishment of the leaders of those who transgress as well as their 
associates and family members is notable as is the encouragement to report the 
misdeeds of others. 


70.12 When a fierce battle has raged at the battle line and 
the enemy has been repulsed and driven down the wall and 
is unable to scale it again, two men are chosen from every 
regiment and rewarded with an increased salary. If a siege is 
defeated where the wall is greater than 1 li in 
circumference, the general in charge is enfeoffed with 30 
li of land and made a guannei hou (Marquis of Guan’nei). 
The deputy general is rewarded with the title of shangqing 
(senior minister) and deputies and officers according to 
their roles, bestowing on them the rank of wudafu (grandee 
of the ninth order). In the case of other officers who are 



brave and take part in the planning of a strong defence, 
knights errant as well as officers on the wall and lesser 
officers of various ranks from the five departments, all are 
rewarded with the title of gongcheng (grandee of the 
eighth order). In the case of men who took part in the 
defence, increase their rank by two grades. In the case of 
women [who took part in the defence], reward them with 
5,000 cash (copper coins). In the case of men and women, 
both old and young, who did not take part in the defence, 
give each person 1,000 cash (copper coins) and remit their 
taxes for three years, so they pay nothing, neither rent nor 
goods taxes. This is the way to encourage officers and 
people to be strong in the defence of a besieged city. 

70.13 The officers and men responsible for the great gate 
are under the charge of no more than two men. The brave 
and daring are in the front line. The five-man squads are 
responsible for each other; each squad is ordered to know 
those on the left and right, and those to the front and rear. 
Those who leave their posts without permission are put to 
death. The commandant of the gate makes three inspections 
during the day and one at night after the drum has sounded 
and the gate has been closed. The Defender frequently 
deputes men to make an inspection and to inform those 
above of men who have left their posts. All meals are taken 



inside the dwelling place and not outside. In respect to 
internuncios, shield-bearers, purifiers and women who 
serve at the front, the Defender must carefully and closely 
examine the nature of their intentions, expressions, 
assignments and conversations. When superiors drink and 
eat, they must order people to taste [the food first]. All 
those who do not comply are bound and asked for their 
reasons. If there is something which displeases the 
Defender in respect to internuncios, shield-bearers, 
purifiers and women serving at the front and the Defender 
says to beat and bind them, those who do not follow the 
order or who bind them later, are all put to death. He must 
frequently and plainly warn them. In the case of all those 
beneath the gate, morning or evening, sitting or standing, 
each is ordered to place himself according to age and 
seniority. In the morning and evening, when they take up 
positions, first place to the right those with merit and 
ability. All the rest are to stand according to rank. Every 
five days each officer reports to his superior any cases of 
someone larking about, or not taking a serious attitude, or 
taking pleasure in ridiculing or harassing others. 

70.14 All men and officers who are sent out and return 
must be ordered to present some form of identification 
when they go out and come back. If a senior officer of the 



defence makes an inspection tour of the district, he must 
send a reliable man beforehand to check that the 
circumstances at the garrison are satisfactory. 

Subsequently, his own man and the garrison commander can 
come out to meet him. When they have informed him of 
conditions, they can all enter. Attendants must constantly 
observe the intentions of those above them and follow 
them when they go forth - but only their own superiors. 
They must not follow others unless ordered to do so by 
their superior. 

70.15 ‘Guest’ troops [can assist] the defence of the ‘host’ 
troops, but when they are participating in defence, the 
‘host’ troops should also defend the ‘guest’ troops. In the 
case of troops within a city whose own troops have already 
fallen to the enemy, great care should be taken, frequently 
checking their register. Those from the same town are not 
allowed to defend the same place together. Those officers 
in charge of stairs and gates should examine their 
[identification] tallies and if there is correspondence, they 
should enter and be accepted. If their [identification] tallies 
don’t correspond, they are seized and the Defender 
informed. In the case of those on the wall, if their attire 
arouses suspicion or they don’t follow orders, [then they 
too are seized and reported to the Defender]. 



70.16 Hie night drum should be within the main gate of the 
Defender. In the evening, the order is given for a 
cavalryman or messenger carrying an identification tally to 
close the city gate; in either case it must be a person of 
rank. At dusk, the drum is struck ten times and the gates and 
pavilions are all closed. Hiose walking about are put to 
death, [but first] they must be bound and questioned as to 
their reasons. Then the punishment is carried out. When 
daylight is seen, the great drum [is struck] and this allows 
people to move about. Each of the officers of the city gates 
enters and requests the key to open the gate. Immediately 
this is done, they return the key. Hiose who hold 
[identification] tallies do not follow this order. When an 
enemy comes, the tower drums [are struck] five times and 
also drums are struck all around. Various small drums then 
respond to this. Hiose who join the army after the small 
drums have sounded five times are punished. Commands 
must be sufficiently fear-inducing and rewards must be 
sufficiently beneficial. Orders must be carried out. Once 
orders are issued, people must follow them at once. Be on 
the lookout for orders that can be carried out not being 
carried out. 

70.17 Passwords: at night there are passwords. Omission 
of the password is punished. Create regulations pertaining 



to defence preparations and publish them, saying, ‘such and 
such a regulation’. Display them publicly in offices, 
streets, lanes, stairways and gates, and order those going to 
and fro to look at them and know them. All officers, 
soldiers and ordinary people who make plans to kill or 
injure their general or leader, as well as those who have 
plans to rebel, [are guilty of] the same crime. Tlrose who 
are able to seize them and inform on them are rewarded 
with 20 jin of yellow gold and the perpetrators are 
punished severely. Tlrose who take upon themselves 
activities that are not their responsibility, for example 
those who take it upon themselves to control things that it 
is not their proper place to control, are put to death. All 
officers, soldiers and ordinary people who take it upon 
themselves to enter other divisions that are not their own 
divisions are immediately detained and handed over to the 
sikong (Minister of Works) or hou (an attendant) of their 
division and the hou informs the Defender. Tlrose who do 
not detain [such people] or who take it upon themselves to 
release them are put to death. In the case of those who are 
able to seize one person who is planning to rebel, betray 
the city or scale the wall to go over to the enemy, use the 
laws to commute the death penalty for two men or hard 
labour for four men. In the case of those who go over the 



wall abandoning their parents, the parents, wives, children 
[and siblings of those absconding, are all put to death]. 

Comment: This section has three components: passwords or watchwords; the 
public display of regulations and the need for people to be familiar with them; and 
several crimes - planning to kill or injure leaders, doing things or going places that 
are outside the person’s responsibility, and going over the wall and thus abandoning 
one’s parents. All are punished by the execution of the perpetrator - or of the 
family members left behind in the last case. 


70.18 Bring out all the materials from people’s houses - 
tiles or large stones - reckon up the quantity and record the 
size. If [material] that should be brought out is not brought 
out, the officer is at fault. All the soldiers and people 
positioned on the wall in each case protect those to their 
left and right. If those to the left or right are guilty of a 
crime and they don’t know about it, then the next five-man 
squad is guilty of a crime. If someone is personally able to 
apprehend a criminal or report him to an officer, in all 
cases reward him. If someone is not in a five-man squad but 
knows beforehand of another five-man-squad’s crime, in all 
cases double his reward. 

70.19 Outside the wall is the Director’s responsibility; 
inside the wall is the Defender’s responsibility. If those 
under the Director, his assistants and the commandant 
abscond, they are held responsible. If the number of those 
absconding is a full ten men or more, then the punishment 



for each is to be downgraded two ranks. If the number is 
one hundred men or more, the Director, his assistants and 
the commandant are reduced to the ranks. In all cases they 
can atone for their crime, but to do so they must capture a 
number of the enemy equal to the number of men they have 
lost. Tlren they are pardoned. 

70.20 In calling for people who wish to use materials, cloth 
or grain to trade or exchange for various utensils, they 
should be given a fair price. If townspeople who are 
friends, or older or younger brothers commit a crime, even 
if it is not in the same district, and they wish to use husked 
or unhusked grain, gold or money, cloth or silk, or other 
materials to atone for it, order that they be allowed to do 
so. For transmitting messages, there should be one person 
every 10 bu. Those who delay a message or fail to transmit 
it are put to death. All matters that may be advantageous are 
quickly transmitted to the Defender as messages. Officers, 
soldiers and ordinary people who wish to convey 
something quickly should make a transmission of the 
message [by] asking an officer. Those who delay or do not 
request a message [to be sent] are put to death. 

70.21 Each district reports [to those] above the number of 
its heroes, strategic advisers, senior officials and rich 



households. 


70.22 Officers, soldiers and people in government offices 
below the wall protect those to the front and rear, and those 
to the left and right from fire. If a fire starts spontaneously, 
those who spread it to others are put to death. All those 
who use the many and strong to oppress the weak and few, 
as well as those who rape other men’s wives or daughters, 
so creating a great clamour, are put to death. 

70.23 At all city gates and posts, care is taken to examine 
the tallies of those coming and going. If a tally is doubtful 
or there is no tally, then in all cases the person goes to the 
district court and is questioned about what he was sent for. 
Those who have satisfactory tallies are accommodated well 
in government buildings. If they have friends or brothers 
whom they wish to see, they are sent for, but they (the tally 
holders) are not allowed within the streets and lanes. In the 
case of someone who has a question to ask of the elder or 
the gate guard, it is possible to allow the elder’s steward to 
transmit it. In the case of other matters or of people of 
lowly rank, they are not allowed to enter the streets or 
lanes. Elders are not allowed to go to the houses of the 
ordinary people. Messages and orders within the wards are 
by feathers; the feathers are kept in the elder’s office. The 



head of each household is responsible for orders within the 
dwelling. Those who fail to carry out or who delay the 
orders are put to death. Households have a defender in 
charge of provisions. Officers, soldiers and ordinary 
people who are without tallies but take it upon themselves 
to enter the lanes and offices of award, and officers, elders 
and gate guards who fail to stop and interrogate them, are 
all put to death. 

70.24 All those who steal defensive implements and 
weapons, or materials, or steal from others are put to death, 
if the value is one cash (copper coin) or above. Officers, 
soldiers and ordinary people should each write their names 
in large writing on a placard within their offices (barracks). 
Hie Defender inspects their offices (barracks) and those 
who have entered on their own responsibility are put to 
death. On the wall, every day there is an issue of mats 
which allows them to be exchanged and reissued. If there is 
concealment of prohibited items or failure to report such 
concealment, offenders are put to death. 

70.25 In the case of an officer, soldier or ordinary person 
dying, immediately summon their relatives who, with the 
deputy sikong, bury them. Do not let [the family members] 
sit around weeping. In the case of those who are badly 



wounded, let them return home to heal the wound and be 
well looked after. Provide a doctor who gives medicines. 
Give them 2 sheng of wine and 2 jin of meat per day. Order 
an officer to go repeatedly to their village to see if the 
wound has healed. [If it has,] he immediately notifies those 
above. In the case of those who falsely wound themselves 
to avoid their service, put the whole family to death. When 
the battle is over, the Defender sends officers to go in 
person to approach the families of the dead and wounded 
and to go to their houses to offer condolences and express 
sympathy. 

70.26 When the enemy has withdrawn and the battle is over, 
offer a sacrifice repaying the spirits for their blessing and 
assistance. The Defender gives the order to reward heroes 
of the districts who fought valiantly and all those with 
merit. He himself must go to the families of the dead and 
wounded to offer condolences and express sympathy to 
them and personally to see the surviving relatives of the 
dead. When the siege of the city has ended, the Chief 
quickly sends out messengers to give recognition to 
officers and men, picking out those with merit, as well as 
those who have died or been wounded, and bestowing on 
them rank and salary. Tire Defender himself honours and 



favours them, making it clear that he values them. This lets 
resentment be directed towards the enemy. 


70.27 On the wall, soldiers and officers each protect those 
to their left and right. If there is someone who wishes to 
collude with [the enemy] outside the wall, his parents, wife, 
children and siblings are all put to death. Those to the left 
or right who know [of his plans] but do not seize and 
denounce him are all guilty of the same crime. Families in 
the wards below the wall should all protect each other, just 
like those on the wall. Anyone who is able to seize or 
denounce [a traitor] should be enfeoffed with a district of 
one thousand households. If [the traitor] they seize is not to 
the left or right, but is in another five-man squad, enfeoff 
them with a district of two thousand households. 

Comment: The issue of the mutual responsibility people have for those near or 
adjacent to them (see also, e.g., 70.13), and the penalties for failing to meet these 
responsibilities. In addition, there are rewards for those who identify transgressors. 


70.28 Wall Prohibitions: officers, soldiers and ordinary 
people who imitate the enemy’s identification tallies and 
banners are executed. Those who don’t follow orders are 
executed. Those who take it upon themselves to issue 
orders are executed. Those who neglect orders are 
executed. Those who prop up their halberds, lean against 
the wall and don’t go with the majority are executed. Those 



who don’t answer or recklessly call are executed. Those 
who set free those who have committed a crime are 
executed. Those who praise the enemy and spread slander 
inside the wall are executed. Those who leave their post and 
gather to talk are executed. Those who hear the city drum 
sound five times and are late going to their post are 
executed. Everyone must write their own name in large 
writing on a placard which is hung at their post. Tire 
Defender must personally inspect the front and rear of his 
post, and those who are not at that post or have recklessly 
entered it are executed. Those who leave their post to the 
left or right and together enter another post, and those to 
the left or right who don’t seize [them], as well as those 
who carry private letters, make requests or bear letters for 
others, or who set aside defensive matters to attend to 
private matters, or soldiers or ordinary people who steal 
each other’s houses or children, are all to be executed 
without [possibility of] pardon. People who bring reports 
are to be recorded [in a register]. Those who pass randomly 
within the army but have no tally are executed. When the 
enemy is beneath the wall, [those soldiers on the wall] 
must, at the appropriate times, change their posts but their 
support personnel should not change. 

Comment: Somewhat random list of offences, all of which attract the death 
penalty (see 70.2 comment). The final sentence, however, repeats the instruction 



given in 52.20. 


70.29 Praising the enemy: [those who] take few to be many, 
disorder to be order or a clumsy enemy attack to be a 
clever attack are put to death. There should be no verbal 
exchanges between the enemy and the defenders. If the 
enemy shoots in letters, they should not be picked up. If 
[enemies] outside display their skills to [the defenders] 
within, there should be no response. Those who don’t 
follow these orders are all put to death. It is forbidden to 
pick up letters shot in by the enemy or to shoot letters at 
the enemy. In the case of those who transgress the orders, 
their parents, wives and children are put to death and their 
bodies exposed on the wall. Those who are able to seize 
and denounce them are rewarded with 20 jin of gold. Those 
who can move about at prohibited times are only the 
Defender, those carrying the tallies of the Grand Defender 
and messengers. 

70.30 When the Defender takes responsibility for the 
defence of the city, he must carefully question elders, 
officers and great officers about all those who have 
unresolved grievances or enmities with one another. He 
should summon such people and definitively resolve [their 
disputes] for them. He must personally identify such 
people, make a record of them and keep them apart. In the 



case of those whose personal grievances harm the affairs 
of the city or its officers, their parents, wives and children 
are all put to death. Those who collude with [the enemy] 
outside are to have all their family [put to death]. Those 
who are able to capture, seize or denounce such people are 
to be enfeoffed with a city the size of that which is being 
defended. Tire Defender gives them his seal, confers 
honours and favours on them, and gives them an official 
position, letting officers and great officers, as well as 
soldiers and people, all clearly know about it. In the case of 
local worthies who have frequent intercourse with feudal 
lords outside, [the Defender] should visit them often, order 
the local leader to get to know them well and keep an eye 
on them. He should also frequently entertain them and 
invite them to dine [with him] so as not to let them come 
and go as they please. [He should also] bind them to him by 
holding hostages. In the case of leaders of the districts and 
wards, elders and local worthies, their relatives, parents, 
wives and children must be honoured and favoured. If there 
are poor people who are unable to provide themselves with 
food, those above should give them food. In addition, at 
appropriate times the parents, relatives, wives and children 
of brave knights are all to be given wine and meat. He (the 
Defender) must show them respect and they must be 
quartered near the Grand Defender. Tire Defender’s tower 



should be adjacent to the hostage quarters and be skilfully 
encircled. It must be a thickly plastered tower which does 
not let those below see what is above, whereas those above 
should be able to see what is below Those below do not 
then know whether there are people above or not. 

Comment: A somewhat miscellaneous set of instructions to a Defender for when 
he takes charge of the defence of a city: to eliminate destructive differences among 
those in positions of authority, to foster harmony and well-being among them and 
to keep abreast of events beyond the confines of the wall. Finally, there are 
recommendations about the construction of the Defender’s tower. 


70.31 For those who are close to him, the Defender should 
pick officers who are honest and incorruptible, loyal and 
reliable, impartial, and able to meet their responsibilities. 
There is no need to prohibit drink and food, [such as] wine 
and meat. Each is to guard his own cash and gold, cloth and 
silk, and material things, taking care that there is no 
stealing from each other. Tire walls of the buildings housing 
the hostages must be three in number. On the tops of the 
walls, those defending pile up broken fragments of pots. On 
the gates there are officers who are in charge of all the 
gates of the wards. In closing and locking the gates, they 
must wait for the Grand Defender’s tally. For the protecting 
guard, [the Defender] must select warlike soldiers who are 
particularly reliable. There must be careful selection of 



officers who are loyal and reliable, impartial, and able to 
meet their responsibilities. 

Comment: Continues the instructions to the Defender: his choice of close 
associates, the building of walls around the hostage buildings and matters regarding 
the gates. 

70.32 Order those guarding the general to build themselves 
surrounding walls 10 chi high. In the case of those on the 
large and small gates, order them to guard the commander’s 
gate as well. 

Comment: There are different views on this section: who is ordered to build the 
surrounding wall for the general, and whether those responsible for the large and 
small gates are also to be responsible for the sima (commander’s) gate or not. 


70.33 Those who ‘watch the vapours’ must be quartered 
near the Grand Defender, while the shamans must be 
quartered near the public altars of soil. They must be 
respected and treated as spirits. Tire shamans, prayer- 
makers, recorders and those who ‘watch the vapours’ must 
use favourable words to inform the people but must report 
the true situation to the Defender. Tire Defender alone 
should know the true state of affairs and that is all. Shamans 
and vapour-watchers if they self-importantly spread bad 
news to startle and frighten the people, are executed 
without possibility of pardon. 



Comment: Hie prognosticators are to be quartered in 
appropriate places and must withhold any discouraging 
information from the general populace, informing the 
Defender alone. 

70.34 If it is calculated that food will be insufficient, each 
person should make known how much he has, recording for 
a family the amount of the five grains in dan and sheng. A 
fixed time is set for this. Record [the results] in a register 
along with the various goods and materials that officers 
give in compensation. When the time limit is reached, in 
the cases of those who have hidden [food] and have not 
made it known or who have made it known but 
incompletely, order officers and soldiers to make 
observations and apprehend [them]. All [who have done 
this] are executed. Hiose who are able to seize and 
denounce [offenders] are rewarded with three-tenths [of the 
grain]. Collect unhusked and husked grain, cloth and silk, 
cash and gold, and locate and gather domestic animals. In 
all cases, value them at a fair price, give [the people] a 
contract with the chief and record it. When the siege is 
over, repay each person, rewarding him with double the 
price. Also use the price, value and amount to confer rank. 
In the case of those who wish to become officers, let them 
do so. In the case of those who do not wish to become 



officers but wish to receive reward, rank or emolument, or 
who wish to redeem relatives or acquaintances who have 
committed a crime, order that they be permitted to do so. 

In the case of those who have received rewards, let them 
visit the hostage quarters and hand over their relatives [to 
them]. In the case of all those who wish to assist their 
superiors again, double their ranks and rewards. [In the 
record there should be,] for a certain district, ward or 
individual family with two mouths to feed, a pile of grain of 
600 dan ; and for a certain district, ward or individual 
family with ten mouths to feed, a pile of grain of 100 dan. 
For bringing out the unhusked and husked grain have a time 
limit. When the time limit has passed, any grain that is not 
brought out is confiscated. Those who are able to seize or 
denounce [offenders] are rewarded with three-tenths [of the 
grain]. Be careful not to let the people know the amount of 
unhusked and husked grain. 

70.35 When the Defender enters the city, the first thing he 
does is acquire scouts (spies). Having acquired them, he 
immediately quarters them and provides food for them. He 
does not let them know about the preparations for defence, 
lire scouts are given separate quarters and their parents, 
wives and children all share these same quarters. Urey are 
given clothing and food, wine and meat. Send a trustworthy 



officer to look after them well. When the scouts come 
back again, they are questioned. Hie Defender’s dwelling 
should have three encircling walls. Towers are built at the 
corners of the outer encircling wall. [Also,] towers are 
built on the inner encircling wall which are 1 zhang 5 chi 
[high] where they enter the hostage quarters. And make a 
double road. Hie hostage quarters should not have 
[separate] apartments. Every three days there should be an 
issue of mats. Closely inspect them and spread rushes in 
the dwelling to a thickness of 3 chi or greater. In sending 
out scouts, knights of the districts and fiefs who are loyal 
and trustworthy, skilled and honest must be sent. Hieir 
close relatives, wives and children are to be substantially 
rewarded with money and property. It is certainly 
important, when sending out scouts, to take care of their 
parents or wives and children and make separate quarters 
for them, so they are not in the same place as [other] 
officers. Give them wine and meat as food. 

Comment: This and sections 70.36 and 70.37 are about the employment and 
deployment of scouts or spies. 

70.36 When [the Defender] sends out other scouts (spies), 
they are rewarded materially as for the previous scouts. 
When they return, compare their reliability. If it is sound, 
reward them. If three lots of scouts are sent out and all 



three are reliable, double the reward. In the case of those 
who don’t wish to receive rewards, but wish to become 
officers, promise them an official position of 200 dan. 

The Defender confers on them a seal. In the case of those 
who don’t wish to become officers but wish to receive 
rewards and salaries, treat them all as previously indicated. 
Reward those who are able to penetrate deeply into enemy 
territory twice as much as the other scouts, once assured of 
the veracity of their reports. If they don’t wish to receive 
rewards but wish to become officers, promise them an 
official position of 300 dan. In the case of those knights 
who are rewarded for guarding the wall and moat, the 
Defender must personally visit their parents to let it be 
seen how much he respects such men. In the case of those 
who wish to assist their superiors again, the rewards in 
terms of rank, emolument and the opportunity to redeem 
those who have transgressed are doubled. 

70.37 Tire scouts should set up flags on high and suitable 
places not more than 10 li [from the wall]. Each flag should 
have three men to guard it. Extending back to the wall, there 
should be three flags, so there can be communication 
between the beacon towers on the wall and the positions of 
the flags. In the daytime, this is by smoke. At night, it is by 
fire. When it is heard where the enemy is coming from, and 



the formation and inevitability of attack are known, give 
consideration to the small cities that cannot defend 
themselves. Completely protect those who are old and 
weak, the millet and rice, and the domestic animals. Send 
out not more than fifty soldiers and scouts (spies) but when 
the enemy reaches the parapet, withdraw them. Take care 
there is no delay. The group of scouts should not exceed 
three hundred men. In the evening, send them out carrying 
some identification. In the case of empty places, wild but 
strategically important places where people come and go, 
the scouts are to follow their tracks and establish their 
whereabouts. There should be not less than three men per 
ward. As soon as it is light, send them out to track. Each 
[scout] sets up his signal and those on the wall respond to 
him. The advance guard should sit both inside and outside 
the outer wall and also set up a signal. One half of the 
advance guard must be allowed to remain stationed within 
the outer wall, so the enemy has no way of knowing their 
number. If there is an alarm and the enemy is seen to have 
advanced beyond the signal in the field, those on the wall 
raise a flag to make known the enemy’s movements. When 
the enemy is seen, one beacon is raised. When the enemy 
enters the region, two beacons are raised. When the enemy 
approaches the outer wall, three beacons are raised. When 
the enemy enters the outer wall, four beacons are raised. 



When the enemy approaches the inner wall, five beacons 
are raised. At night, fire is used; in all cases the numbers 
are the same. 

Comment: This section is not clear regarding the exact arrangement of signalling 
between the scouts and those on or by the wall (and precisely how the latter are 
arranged). 


70.38 For a distance of 100 bu from the outer wall, high 
and low walls as well as trees and timber both large and 
small should be cut down and removed completely. lire 
wells of private dwellings outside [the wall] should be 
filled in completely, so water cannot be drawn from them. 
Private dwellings outside the wall should be destroyed 
completely and trees completely cut down. Anything that 
might be used in attacking the city is taken inside the wall. 
Let each person have a record of what is his. When the 
attack is over, each person can use the record to reclaim 
what is his. Tire officers making the bonds should write 
down the number of items. If there are trees and timber 
facing the road that cannot be completely brought within 
[the wall], burn them so as not to let the enemy get hold of 
them and use them. 

70.39 People should write [their names] in person in large 
writing on boards and display them at their posts (offices). 
Tire authorities should issue a proclamation in relation to 



military discipline that anyone who indulges in licentious 
behaviour will have his ears pierced with an arrow. Arrogant 
and self-important people who deceive upright people, 
make a continuous clamour, stop many people on the roads 
preventing them from going about their normal business or 
causing them to delay it to an inappropriate time without 
informing their superiors are to have their ears pierced 
with an arrow. Those who shout out and frighten the people 
are punished by death. Those who condemn their superiors 
without remonstrating with them or who unrestrainedly 
indulge in evil words are punished by death. No one in the 
army should dare to have musical instruments or [the game] 
weiqi. Those who do are to have their ears pierced with an 
arrow. No one should dare to gallop a cart or run on foot 
without an order from an officer. Those who do are to have 
their ears pierced with an arrow. No one in the army should 
dare to scatter oxen or horses. Those who do are to have 
their ears pierced with an arrow. Those who drink or eat at 
inappropriate times are to have their ears pierced with an 
arrow. No one in the army should dare to sing or wail. 

Those who do are to have their ears pierced with an arrow. 
Let each person in charge of punishments complete the 
death penalty [where appropriate]. If there is an officer who 
sees a crime but does not report it, he should receive the 
same punishment. Or if he lets [the perpetrator] escape, he 



should also be put to death. In all cases, generals and 
leaders who fight with the ordinary people in disregard of 
the laws are put to death. In all cases, supervisors who do 
not send knights, soldiers, officers and people to hear the 
oath of command are to suffer the punishment in their 
stead. In all cases, people are put to death in the 
marketplace and their corpses exposed for three days. 

Comment: Mostly a list of relatively trivial offences punishable by piercing the 
ears, a punishment not hitherto mentioned. 


70.40 Tire guards in attendance outside the gate of the 
defence headquarters should be in two groups sitting on 
either side of the gate. Urey are to take turns in eating so as 
not to leave [the gate] unattended. Tire guards at the gate are 
to select one leader who, at appropriate times, enters and 
informs the Defender of conditions. The Defender 
examines the list of those who have absconded and makes 
the guard and their leader responsible for seeking out the 
absentees and reporting them. Four men are to sit on either 
side of the defence headquarters gate within, and two men 
are to sit outside the san (?exit) gate on either side. When 
visitors are seen, they are to take hold of their weapons and 
stand in front [of the gate]. Urey are to take their meals in 
turns and are to announce the names [of the visitors] to 
their superiors. A high tower should be built below the 



Defender’s hall. When those on watch look out and see 
carriages, horsemen or foot soldiers approaching along the 
road outside, as well as anything out of the ordinary inside 
the wall, they immediately report this to the Defender. Tire 
Defender waits for those on lookout on the wall, as well as 
the district officers, to come and inform him of the 
circumstances in order to verify them. Those men below 
the tower are to receive the reports of the lookouts and 
announce them to the Defender. Two attendants sit on 
either side inside the san gate. Tire gates are always closed. 
Tire attendants should take their meals in turn and there 
should be one leader for them. 

Comment: In the first four sentences, I understand the yezhe to be guards who are 
positioned outside the defence headquarters or the Defender’s quarters where they 
await orders. 


70.41 For the connecting roads that surround the 
Defender’s dwelling, build a narrow road with a wall on 
each of its two sides to a height of 1 zhang and make 
observation holes[, so that those on the wall can look into 
the hostage quarters]. When wooden tablets with writing 
are obtained, they must be carefully examined and verified. 
If there are places where they are not satisfactory, then they 
are not for the moment passed on, pending correction. Tire 
walls on the narrow road outside the thoroughfares both 
have towers high enough to overlook the wards. On [each] 



tower there is one drum and a portable furnace. Then if 
there is some reason, the drum [is sounded]. When the 
officer arrives, this stops. At night, fire is used to indicate 
where the drum is. Below the wall there should be one 
latrine every 50 bu. Tire latrines should be the same on and 
below the wall. Those who have committed crimes but are 
not to be put to death are sent to clean out the latrines as a 
punishment. 



71 


Miscellaneous Defences 
(Za Shou ) 


71.1 QinZi questioned [Master Mo], saying: ‘Suppose 
enemies are many and brave, recklessly flaunting their 
courage to intimidate our leader? Suppose they raise up 
brushwood and earth together to build a yangqin (high 
mound), piling up earth to make a high [structure] in order 
to approach [our] people. Suppose they cover it with 
shields at the front and bring it adjacent to the wall, 
positioning swordsmen and archers on top of it. What is to 
be done then?’ 

Master Mo replied: ‘Are you asking about defence 
against the yangqin ? Attack by yangqin is a clumsy form 
of attack. It is enough to tire out the soldiers but not 
enough to harm the city wall. In dealing with an attack by 
yangqin, if it is distant, then oppose it at a distance. If is 



near, then oppose it near so the danger does not reach the 
city wall. Shoot arrows and hurl stones at it from both sides 
incessantly. Follow these with large stones, thus 
demonstrating the resolve [of the defenders]. Send out 
crack troops who are not likely to retreat and who will 
ruthlessly strike so the attackers will readily flee. Cultivate 
a spirit of courage and the people’s hearts will be 
strengthened a hundredfold. If those of your soldiers who 
seize many of the enemy are well rewarded, they will 
maintain their resolve.’ 

71.2 If it is impossible to prevent the enemy piling up earth 
to a great height and the earth pile has come near to the 
wall, respond to this by using the method of resisting cloud 
ladders. In general, when expecting [attack by] the filling in 
of moats, battering rams, cloud ladders or lin 
(approaches), there must be the choice of an appropriate 
method of withstanding them. If the piled-up stones are 
inadequate, use wooden planks. To the left for 100 bu and 
to the right for 100 bu, throw down arrows, stones, sand 
and burning charcoal as thick as rain, and also pour down 
burning firewood and boiling water. Choose fierce and 
valiant soldiers, being careful not to send those who 
harbour doubts. Examine rewards and carry out 
punishments, taking calmness as the basis. And if the 



advance must be swift, do not let the men waver. Cultivate a 
spirit of courage and the hearts of the people will be 
strengthened a hundredfold. If those of your soldiers who 
seize many of the enemy are well rewarded, they will 
maintain their resolve. [If the enemy uses] battering rams, 
lin or cloud ladders, all these can be opposed by striking 
them with battering rams. 

71.3 Large qu (shields) should be 1 zhang 5 chi long with 
a buried part of 3 chi. Their poles should be 1 zhang 2 chi 
long. The width of the large qu should be 1 zhang 6 chi. 
Their ‘ladders’ should be 1 zhang 2 chi [long] and the large 
qu should hang down 4 cun. In setting up the large qu. the 
distance from the parapet should not exceed 5 cun, with 
one ‘ladder ’ every 7 chi. Overall, the number of large qu 
and screens should be 258 per li, there being 129 of each. 

Comment: On large qu, see also 52.9 and 52.17. Yates (T) thinks the ‘ladders’ (ti) 
refers to the arms. 


71.4 All outside roads should have fortifications built to 
create difficulty for the enemy. On those that offer the 
greatest danger, build three ting (posts) in a triangular 
arrangement with one post at each corner like the ‘spinning 
damsel’, so they are able to come to each other’s aid. All 
large hills, mountains and forests, ditches and 
watercourses, hillocks and mounds, paths and fields, outer 



gates, and lanes and streets can have obstructions set up, as 
well as identification signs, so it is possible to trace and 
know the number of those coming and going, and also the 
places where they might conceal themselves. 

71.5 In protecting the people, first consider the size of the 
government offices, people’s houses and the various 
different dwelling places, then assign the ordinary people 
temporary quarters. If some of those being protected wish 
to go along with older and younger brothers, or with their 
friends, let them do so. All the grain, domestic animals and 
materials from houses lying outside the city that can be of 
assistance are sent into the city. When matters are pressing, 
these things should be piled up within the gates. When the 
people contribute grain, cloth and silk, gold and money, 
oxen and horses, and domestic animals, a fair price is set in 
all cases and there is a contract with the leader which 
documents it. 

71.6 If you get each person to do what they are good at, the 
affairs of the world will be as they should be. If you equate 
their appointments with their responsibilities, the affairs of 
the world will be accomplished. If all people do what they 
like doing, the affairs of the world will come to 



completion. If the strong and the weak have their destiny, 
the affairs of the world are set out. 

71.7 In making beacon towers, they should be round and of 
a height greater than 3 zhang. Urey should be narrow at the 
top and broad at the base. Make ladders with arms, the two 
arms being 3 zhang in length. The connecting planks 
should be 3 chi (apart), making use of rope to bind them [to 
the arms]. Over a twice-encircling moat make a suspended 
bridge. There should be a portable furnace and one drum in 
every beacon tower. [There are three situations in which a 
beacon fire is used:] when the enemy invades, when there is 
an emergency and when there is disorder. In transmitting 
these fires, respond in the proper sequence. When the 
message reaches the leader of the country, stop. When 
there are urgent conditions, drag a well-sweep causing it to 
raise and disperse smoke [as a signal]. When a beacon fire 
is already lit, immediately strike the drum five times and 
also use fire with this to tell where the enemy is coming 
from and how great its numbers are. Don’t be slow. Cause 
the messages to come and go continuously without 
stopping the lighting of fires. When the enemy is seen, 
light one beacon fire. When the enemy enters the region, 
light two beacon fires. When the enemy rapidly advances to 
a crucial point, light three beacon fires and strike the drum 



three times. When the enemy enters the outer wall, light 
four beacon fires and strike the drum four times. When the 
enemy advances close to the wall, light five beacon fires 
and strike the drum five times, hr lighting fires at night, use 
the same numbers. Beacon fires in defence are a pressing 
matter. 

71.8 [The number of] scouts (spies) should not exceed 
fifty. When the enemy reaches the parapet (outer wall), the 
scouts should withdraw immediately. Send them at night 
and order them all to have identification. Their orders are 
to look for the tracks [of the enemy] in all parts of the hills, 
mountains and forests where there can be tracks. At 
daybreak, they should look for tracks; there should be not 
be fewer than three men every li. Each one sets up a signal 
flag to inform those on the wall who, when they see the 
signal flag, set up a signal flag in response. When the 
scouts go beyond the signal flags in the fields, the advance 
defenders take up positions inside and outside the outer 
wall and set up flags and pennons. The advance guard must 
keep one half [of their number] inside the outer wall, so 
[the enemy] has no way of knowing their number. If an 
urgent situation arises, [the scouts] raise an outside signal 
flag. If the enemy is seen, they set up a second signal flag. 
On the wall, a flag is used to indicate the direction of the 



enemy. When the advance guard see the flag, they take up 
their positions, strike the drum and raise the flag, and 
quickly send men equipped for battle to the place indicated. 
Men who are in the fields should be prepared for battle and 
should follow [the commandant] in intercepting [the 
enemy]. Women should quickly go into the city. When the 
enemy is seen, strike the drum once through the city and 
stop. Three men are deputed to defend the signal flag and, 
further, to establish a lookout at the chid signal flag. Tire 
Defender frequently sends cavalrymen or officers to carry 
out a patrol and, determine what the conditions are. At 
every point, one drum is placed, and when the enemy is 
seen, the drum is struck to transmit [the fact] around the 
city and then stopped. 

71.9 [If the daily ration is] 1 don of food, in the whole year 
36 dan [will be used]. If each day, yl of a dou is eaten, in 
the whole year 24 dan [will be used]. If each day */ o I' a 
dou is eaten, in the whole year 18 dan [will be used]. If 
each day, y of a dou is eaten, in the whole year 14 dan and 
4 dou [will be used]. If each day, ■/, of a dou is eaten, in the 
whole year 12 dan [will be used]. On a ration of 1 dou per 
day, at each meal 5 sheng will be eaten. On a ration of y, of 
a dou per day, at each meal 3*/ sheng will be eaten. On a 
ration of y of a dou per day, at each meal 2Vi sheng will 



be eaten. On a ration of y, of a dou per day, at each meal 2 
sheng will be eaten. On a ration of y 6 of a dou per day, at 
each meal 1 -' of a sheng will be eaten. Each day there are 
two meals. At a time of trying to save people from dying, 2 
sheng are eaten per day for 20 days; 3 sheng are eaten per 
day for 30 days; 4 sheng are eaten per day for 40 days. In 
this way the people can escape from a 90-day period of 
privation. 

71.10 When the enemy approaches, quickly collect any 
metal utensils, either copper or iron, from all the outlying 
districts, as well as anything else that can be of assistance 
in defensive matters. First, take note of the dwellings of 
district officials and non-essential administrative buildings, 
making an inventory of the sum total of all timbers [in 
them], large and small, long and short, so when an 
emergency arises, these are the first to be taken away. 
When the enemy is right at hand, do away with the houses 
and cut down the trees. Even if there are requests [not to do 
this], don’t heed them. In bringing in firewood, don’t pile it 
up irregularly like fish scales. Have [the piles] facing the 
road, allowing easy pickup. If there is wood that cannot be 
completely brought in, burn it so as not to let the enemy 
make use of it. With the piles of wood, each must be 
uniform in terms of length, size, quality and form. [Tire 



wood from] outside the four sides of the city should in 
each case be piled up within [that particular side]. In the 
case of all large pieces of wood, make a hole through them 
and then join them together. 

Comment: The gathering of materials useful for defence 
from outlying areas and their storage inside the city wall. 
Hie important point is to leave nothing that can be made 
use of by the enemy. 

71.11 In defending a city, if those from the rank of 
commander and above have their parents, brothers, wives 
and children held as security in the chief’s dwelling, then 
the city can be strongly defended. Appoint city 
construction officers - four in the case of a large city - 
and two commandants as well as one district commandant 
per side. Have a post captain and a deputy post captain for 
each post. If the officials serving in the Defender’s quarters 
are of sufficient quality, are incorruptible and trustworthy 
and have their parents, brothers, wives and children under 
protection within the dwelling, they can serve as officers. 
Hiere must be a hostage for every officer, so they can be 
held responsible for affairs. Hiere should be two men to 
guard the main gates. Hiey should stand on either side of 
the gates and order those travelling to hasten their exit. 



There should be four halberdiers standing on either side of 
each gate, while the other men sit beneath it. An officer 
should inspect them five times a day and report to the 
superior the names of those not at their posts. 

71.12 On the outer side of the moat, at points that are 
important or vulnerable, effigies must be made to let those 
going back and forth at night fire at them. Plan the distance 
between them. In waters that are outside the wall, place 
bamboo stakes over a width of 2 hit. the stakes being under 
the water a distance of 5 cun, with a mixture of long and 
short ones. Stakes at the outer border (of the moat) should 
be in three rows, with the points of the outer row facing 
outwards and the points of the inner row facing inwards. 
Every 30 bit have one crossbow platform 10 chi wide and 1 
zhang 2 chi long. 

Comment: This section describes dummies or effigies outside the moat to draw 
enemy fire at night; within the moat, the placement of stakes in three rows; and the 
provision of structures for crossbows, which Yates (T) calls ‘crossbow platforms’. 


71.13 Every 100 bu have one troop. If a troop has a 
pressing situation, those in the vicinity should quickly 
come to its assistance, while the next in line take over their 
positions. 



71.14 Hie Defender uses tallies as identification for 
messengers going out and entering. Hie officers 
responsible for tallies must keep a written record. Hie 
conditions recorded and the matter being undertaken must 
correspond. Hie return of the messenger is awaited to 
verify this. If a messenger goes out, the gate which he goes 
through, the time of his exit and the name of the messenger 
must immediately be reported. [Every 100 hit have one 
troop.] Hie doors which give entry to the Defender’s 
quarters are arranged to create a confusing passage. A 
double road is made around them (the Defender’s quarters), 
for which walls are made and skilfully covered above. 

Comment: This section has three components: the tallies for messengers; a four- 
character fragment which certainly seems out of context; and the need for 
precautions with regard to the Defender’s quarters - a confusing passage of entry 
and a double-walled road around them. 


71.15 With regard to gathering vegetables, order the people 
and their families to have a three-year supply of vegetables 
and grains to prepare against flood or drought, or a bad 
harvest. Regularly order the border districts to prepare and 
cultivate the leaves of the yuan, yun, wuhui and zhu. In the 
case of houses outside [the walls], fill in the watercourses 
and wells that can be filled. Place these plants in those that 
can’t be filled in. In times of peace, give thought to danger. 
In times of danger, give thought to peace. 



Comment: The plants are unidentified, but we may assume that they were all 
poisonous. 


71.16 When the enemy comes, give an order that holes are 
to be drilled in all the leaves of the gates and provided with 
covers. Each gate should have two holes. Through one of 
the holes pass a continuous rope 4 chi long and the 
thickness of a finger. When the enemy comes, first kill the 
oxen, sheep, chickens, dogs, ducks, geese and pigs. Flay 
them all, taking their skins, hides, muscle, horns, fat, brains 
and feathers. Use catalpa, tong and chestnut wood and cut it 
with a short axe to make a stand for crossbow bolts. When 
matters are pressing and the soldiers cannot go far, give an 
order to dig up the trees associated with houses outside 
[the wall] and determine their number. If the wall is in good 
repair make a tower of a three-cornered shape. All timber 
that is heavier than 5 jin is immersed in water, but not more 
than 1 fa (‘raft’). Cover thatched houses and piles of 
firewood with mud to a thickness of 5 cun or more. Each 
officer is to make known what material there is in his area 
that can assist his superior in preparing the defence. 

71.17 There are slanderous men and there are men who are 
beneficial. There are bad men and there are good men. 
There are skilled men and there are strategists. There are 
brave knights, there are clever knights and there are 



trustworthy knights. There are those who are ‘internal’ and 
there are those who are ‘external’. There are those who are 
skilled and those who are skilled in fighting. Tire Defender 
must examine what the case is for each man, give him the 
proper name and then include him. When people detest 
each other or are critical of an officer, the officer must 
resolve the dispute and record [the result] on a wooden 
tablet. Tire tablets are then stored to wait a time when the 
matter can be laid open for consideration and verification. 
Youths who are shorter than 5 chi cannot be soldiers. Make 
them temporary officers and order them to perform duties 
in official buildings or barracks. 

71.18 Piles of stones, sharp arrows, and the various 
materials and utensils that are used are all carefully placed, 
each having its piles and allotted amounts. Make yao 
(open-sided) carts of catalpa wood and fill them with 
arrows. Tire solid wheels should be 10 chi wide and have a 
shaft of 1 zhang. Make three cloth coverings, [each] 6 chi 
wide. Make a wooden planked box the same length as the 
shaft and 4 chi high. Cover the top skilfully and arrange the 
interior to let it carry arrows. 

71.19 Master Mo said: ‘In general, there are five situations 
that cannot be defended. A large city with few people is the 



first. Asmall city with many people is the second. Many 
people but few provisions is the third. Markets that are 
distant from the city is the fourth. Stores piled outside the 
city and rich men who are not in the city is the fifth. If 
there are approximately ten thousand families and the city 
is 3 li square, then it can be defended.’ 

Comment: Are these situations that are not easily defended, cannot be defended or 
are not defended - or grounds for not mounting a defence? Of course, all are bad 
circumstances for mounting a defence. 



Dates 


Legendary period: c. 2852-2205 BCE; the last two emperors were Yao and Shun, 
often cited as examples of the ideal emperor. 

Xia Dynasty: 2205-1766 BCE; the first emperor was YU, also an off-cited example 
of the ideal emperor, and the last was Jie, frequently referred to as a paradigmatic 
evil emperor. 

Shang (Yin) Dynasty: 1766-1123 BCE; the first emperor was Cheng Tang, who 
restored the damage done by Jie, and the last was Zhou, often linked with Jie as 
an example of the worst kind of emperor. 

Zhou Dynasty: 1122-255 BCE; the first emperor was Wu, who restored the 
damage done by Zhou. Two subdivisions within this dynasty were the Spring 
and Autumn period (722-476 BCE) and the Warring States period (475-221 
BCE). These two periods (particularly the latter) saw the emergence of the 
‘hundred schools’ of philosophy. 

Dates (uncertain to a variable degree) for the most notable philosophers are as 
follows: 

Confucius (KongZi) 551-479 BCE 
DengXi d. 501 BCE 

Zisi (Confucius’ grandson) 483-402 BCE 

Mo Zi (Mo Di) 479-381 BCE 

Yang Zhu 440-360 BCE 

Mencius 372-289 BCE 

ZhuangZi (ZhuangZhou) 369-286 BCE 

Hui Shi c. 370-300 BCE 



Yin Wen c. 360-280 BCE 
Gongsun Long 325-250 BCE 
Xun Zi (Xun Qing) 298-238 BCE 
Han Fei d. 233 BCE 

Qin Dynasty: 221-206 BCE; noted among other thing? for the burning of books 
apart from those on technical matters. 

Han Dynasty: 206 BCE-221 CE; divided into Former or Western Han (206-9 
BCE) and Later or Eastern Han (25-221 CE) with an interregnum (9 BCE-25 
CE) when the usurper WangMang ruled. The Later Han saw the first known 
contact with Buddhism. 

Three Kingdoms period: 220-280; this period saw the development of Neo- 
Daoism with Wang Bi’s commentary on the Laozi and Guo Xiang’s commentary 
on the Zhuangzi. 

Jin Dynasty: 260-420 

Six Dynasties period (North-South division): 420-589 

Sui Dynasty: 589-618 

Tang Dynasty: 618-907 

Five Dynasties period: 907-960 

Song Dynasty: 960-1260; this period saw the development of Neo-Confucianism, 
particularly through the work of the Cheng brothers and Zhu Xi, in large part as a 
counter to Buddhism. 

Yuan Dynasty: 1271-1368; foreign (i.e. Mongol) rulers. 

Ming Dynasty: 1368-1644; restoration of rule by Han Chinese. 

Qing Dynasty: 1644-1911; foreign (i.e. Manchu) rulers. 



Notes 


SOURCES 

Analects = Lau, D. C., Confucius, The Analects (London: Penguin, 1979). 
Chmielewski, Janusz, ‘Notes on Early Chinese Logic’, Rocznik Orientalistyczny. 
Part I, 26 (1962), pp. 7-22; Part II, 26 (1963), pp. 91-105; Part III, 27 (1963), 
pp. 103-21; Part iy 28 (1965), pp. 87-111; Part y 29 (1965), pp. 117-38; Part 
VI, 30 (1966), pp. 31-52; Part VII, 31 (1968), pp. 117-36; Part VIII, 32 (1969), 
pp. 83-103. 

Chuang Tzu = Watson, Burton, Chuang Tzu (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1968). 

Documents = reprinted in LCC. 

DZ = Dao Zang. The Daoist Patrology or Treasury of the Dao, with approximately 
1,400 titles with a varying degree of connection with Daoism. 

Gongsun Long= Johnston, Ian, ‘The Gongsun Longzi: A Translation and an 
Analysis of its Relationship to Later Mohist Writings’, Journal of Chinese 
Philosophy, 31 (2004), pp. 271-95. 

Graham = Graham, Angus C., Later Mohist Logic, Ethics and Science (Hong Kong: 
Chinese University Press, 1978). 

Hanfeizi = Liao, W. K., The Complete Works of Han Fei Tzu, 2 vols. (London: 
Probsthain: 1939, 1959). 

Hansen, Chad D., ‘Mo-Tzu: Language Utilitarianism’, Journal of Chinese 
Philosophy, 16 (1989), pp. 355-80. 

Huainanzi= Major, John S., Sarah A. Queen, Andrew S. Meyer and Harold D. 
Roth, The Huainanzi (New York: Columbia University Press, 2010). 



Johnston, Mozi = Johnston, Ian, TheMozi: A Complete Translation (Hong Kong: 
Chinese University Press, 2010). 

Laozi= Lau, D. C., Lao Tzu Tao Te Ching (London: Penguin, 1963). 

LCC = Legge, James, The Chinese Classics (Hong Kong, 1960 reprint), 5 vols. 
English translations of the Analects of Confucius ( Lunyu), The Greater Learning 
( Daxue), Doctrine of the Mean ( Zhongyong ), Mencius ( Mengzi ), Documents (Shu 
Jing - History Classic), Odes (Shi Jing - Poetry Classic), Chunqiu (Spring and 
Autumn Annals ) and Zuo Zhuan (the Zuo commentary on the Spring and Autumn 
Annals). 

Lii Shi Chunqiu = Knoblock, John, and Jeffrey K. Riegel, The Annals ofLii Buwei 
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2000). 

Mencius = Lau, D. C., Mencius (London: Penguin Books, 1970). 

MZJC = Yan Lingfeng, (Wu qiu beizhai) Mozi Jizheng, 46 vols. An extensive 
collection of editions of and commentaries and studies on the Mozi. 

SBCK = Sibu Congkan, 100 vols. A collection of a wide range of titles. 

Shiji, 10 vols. (Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju, 1975). 

SSJZS = Shisan Jing Zhushu {The Thirteen Classics with Notes and Commentaries ), 
8 vols., with Yijing {Changes), Shangshu {Documents), Shijing{Odes), the three 
works on li (rites, ceremonies, proper conduct - i.e. Ydi, Liji and Zhouli), the 
three commentaries on the Chunqiu {Spring and Autumn Annals - i.e. Gongyang 
Zhuan, Guliang Zhuan and Zuo Zhuan), the Erya (an ancient dictionary), the 
Lunyu {Analects of Confucius), the Mengzi {Mencius) and the Xiao jing {Classic of 
Filial Piety). 

Sun Yirang, MoziJiangu (1894) (reprinted in MZJC 12-15). 

Wu Feibai, Zhongguo Gumingjia Yan (Beijing, 1983). 

Wu Yujiang, Mozi Jiaozhu, 2 vols. (Beijing, 1993 reprint). 

Xunzi = Knoblock, John, Xunzi: A Translation and Study of the Complete Works, 3 
vols. (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1988-94). 

Yates (SC) = Yates, Robin D. S., ‘Early Poliorcetics: The Mohists to the Sung’, in 
Science and Civilisation in China, ed. Joseph Needham and Robin D. S. Yates, 
vol. V: 6, Military Technology: Missiles and Sieges (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1994). 



Yates (T) = Yates, Robin D. S., ‘The City Under Siege: Technology and 
Organization as Seen in the Reconstructed Text of the Military Chapters of the 
Mo Tzu’, Ph.D. Thesis, Harvard, 1980. 

Zhuangzi = Guo Qingfan, Zhuangzi Jishi, 4 vols. (Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju, 1961). 
Zhou Caizhu and Qi Ruiduan, Mozi (Taipei: Guji Publishing Co., 1998). 


PART I 

The Epitomes 

1. Being Sympathetic to Officers 

1. Qin Shi: On the term shi, here rendered ‘officers’, Hucker (who renders it ‘elite’) 
has: ‘throughout history a broad generic reference to the group dominant in 
government, which was also the paramount group in society; originally a 
warrior caste, it was gradually transformed into a non-hereditary, ill-defined 
class of bureaucrats among whom litterateurs were most highly esteemed ... [in 
Zhou and the North-South division rendered] Servicemen, the lowest of three 
broad categories in which officials were ranked, below Minister and Grand 

M aster ... ’ (C. O. Hucker, A Dictionary of Official Titles in Imperial China 
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1985), p. 421). 

2. Duke Wen ... central states: In 654 BCE, Duke Wen, the son of Duke Xian of 
Jin, was forced to flee the country as a result of a plot against him initiated by 
his father’s favourite concubine, Li Ji; he returned in 634 BCE to rule. Duke 
Huan was forced to flee the state of Qi with his brother by Duke Xiang; after 
the murder of Xiang, the brothers returned and contended over the succession, 
and with the help of Guan Zhong, Duke Huan prevailed to enjoy an extended 
period of rule. Gou Jian came to the throne of "Vue in 496 BCE; when he 
subsequently attacked the state of Wu, he was utterly defeated at the eastern 
gate of the capital by the Wu forces under Fu Chai. Afterwards Gou Jian 
supposedly drank every day from a vessel filled with gall and slept every night 
on firewood to remind himself of the bitterness of defeat. He later overthrew 
Wu. The central states existing during the late Zhou and Warring States periods 


were Chu, Han, Lu, Qi, Qin, Song, Teng, Wei, Yan, Zhao and Zou - see map at 
the end of vol. 1 of Fung Yu-lan’s History of Chinese Philosophy (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1952). 

3. Jie and Zhou : Jie (ruled 1818-1766 BCE) and Zhou (ruled 1154-1122 BCE) are 
standard examples of bad rulers whose excesses led to the downfall of their 
dynasties, Xia and Shang, respectively. See also note 2 to chapter 7. 

4. Bi Gan’s ... of affairs: Bi Gan (twelfth century BCE) was put to death by the 
tyrant Zhou (see note 3) for his outspoken criticism of Zhou’s excesses. Meng 
Ben was noted for his strength and courage, but it is not clear whether a native 
of Wei or of Qi {Mencius IIA.2(2)) is being referred to. If he was put to death 
by King Wu of Qi, it is evidence for this chapter being later than Master Mo 
himself (as is Wu Qi). Xi Shi (fifth century BCE) of Yue, famed for her beauty, 
was the key figure in a stratagem by Gou Jian against Fu Chai. Wu Qi (d. 381 
BCE), a native of Wei, was a noted statesman and military strategist; he served 
in several states. The tradition is that he was killed by fellow officials jealous of 
his great ability. 

5. Heaven and earth ... the state: The meaning of this paragraph is obscure; 
interpretations differ notably. 

3. Dyeing 

1. Shun ... Cai: The examples of the persons ‘dyed’ were the revered early 
emperors of the Three Dynasties period, the Xia, Shang (Ym) and Zhou 
dynasties. The ‘dyers’ are notable examples of statesmen and ministers; for 
further details, see Johnston, Mozi, p. 15, note i. The second set of examples are 
rulers noted for misrule, cruelty and excess: for Jie and Zhou, see note 3 to 
chapter 1; Li and You ruled during the early part of the Zhou Dynasty, 878-827 
BCE and 781-770 BCE, respectively. The ‘dyers’ are examples of flattering and 
unsatisfactory ministers; for further details, see Johnston, Mozi, p. 17, note ii. 

2. Huan of Qi ... Tian Buli: The first five men ‘dyed’ are examples of virtuous and 
effective rulers; for further details on them and their ‘dyers’, see Johnston, 

Mozi, pp. 17, 19, note iii. For details of the six ill-fated rulers and their ‘dyers’, 
see ibid., pp. 19, 21, note iv. 


3. Duangan Mu ... Shu Dao: For these six men, see Johnston, Mozi, p. 23, notes v 
and vi. Qin Zi is Qin Guli, one of Master Mo’s leading disciples, who was 
noted for his skill in defensive warfare. 

4. ‘One must... in This apparent quotation from the Odes (Shi Jing - Poetry 
Classic) cannot be identified in surviving texts. 


4. Standards and Rules 

1. sage kings'. The three mentioned in 3.2 (and note) plus King Wen who was King 
Wu’s father. The four cruel and tyrannical rulers (4.5) are also mentioned in 3.2 
(and note). 


5. The Seven Misfortunes 

1. jive grains'. Rice, two forms of millet, wheat or barley and pulses. 

2. QingJi... was killed : Qing Ji, the son of King Liao of Wu, was noted for 
bravery. When his father was killed by Helii, QingJi fled to Wei where he 
subsequently met his death at the hands of Yao Li. On Jie and Zhou, see note 3 
to chapter 1 and note 1 to chapter 3. 

3. rulers of small... states'. Tang and Wu who overthrew Jie and Zhou to establish 
the Ym and Zhou dynasties, respectively; see Mencius IIA.3(1). 


7. Three Arguments 

1. Cheng Fan : Or Cheng Zi, a scholar who combined both M ohism and 
Confucianism; see also 48.14-15. 

2. Yao ... Jiu Zhao'. Yao and Shun are the repeatedly referred to exemplary 
emperors of the ‘Legendary period’ (third millennium BCE). Jie, the last and 
notoriously evil ruler of the Xia Dynasty, was overthrown by Tang who 
established the Shang(Yin) Dynasty. Hu was music attributed to Tang, while 
Jiu Zhao was music from the Xia Dynasty. 


3. King Wu ... King Cheng : King Wu became the first ruler of the Zhou Dynasty 
after overthrowing Zhou. King Cheng was King Wu’s successor and is said to 
have ruled 1115-1078 BCE. 

4. Cheng Tang : Or Tang, was the first ruler of the Shang (Ym) Dynasty (1766- 
1753 BCE). 

PART II 

Core Doctrines 

8. Exalting Worthiness I 

1. Shang Xian: There are different opinions on how the title should be rendered. I 
read shang as zunzhong (to value or esteem) or as chongshang (to advocate or 
uphold) in chapters 8-10 and 11-13. 1 have used ‘exalt’ to attempt to convey 
the idea that both worthiness and unity (of ideals) should be valued or 
advocated to the extent of being raised to the level of principles. See also note 1 
to chapter 11. 

2. Yao brought forward ... subdued: Yao and Shun are often referred to as the last 
emperors of the Legendary period. Yi was the first emperor of the Xia 
Dynasty, while Yi (Bo Y) was employed by Yi for his skill in animal 
husbandly and hunting In both examples, the second named succeeded the first. 
The ‘Nine Regions’ refers to the unification of the kingdom. Yi Ym was a chief 
minister under Tang the first emperor of the Shang Dynasty: see note 4 to 
chapter 9. Both Hong Yao (Hongyao) and Tai Dian were noted ministers under 
King Wen of Zhou; see the Documents (Shu Jing - History Classic), VXVI. 12 
(LCC, vol. 3, p. 481). It is not known where Fu Marsh or Yinfang were. 

9. Exalting Worthiness II 

1. I tell... hands: Odes, ‘SangRou’ (Mao 257, verse 5; LCC, vol. 4, p. 522). 

2. “Ju Nian ” ... world: The ‘Ju Nian’ is most commonly believed to be the title of 
a lost book or chapter; it is called ‘Shu Nian’ in 10.4. Chuan is probably a 


general term for ancient chronicles; two ancient sources have similar statements, 
the Yixun and the Guoyu (SBCK, vol. 14). The quotation from the ‘Oath of 
Tang’ is actually to be found in the ‘Announcement of Tang’; see th e Documents 
(LCC, vol. 3,p. 187). 

3. Shun ... Son of Heaven: Yao’s choice of Shun as his successor is repeated in 
10.3; see the Documents (LCC, vol. 3, pp. 15-27, particularly pp. 26-7) and 
also the Shiji (Records of the Grand Historian), vol. 1, pp. 2 Iff. 

4. K Zhi... minister: Or Yi Ym (and Xiao Chin 10.6) was chosen by Tang. The 
tradition is that he attached himself to the bridal party of a woman from Xin 
who was being married to Tang, and that he himself came to the attention of 
Tang through his culinary skills; for a discussion, see the Documents (LCC, vol. 
3, pp. 191-2), and for an alternative account, see Mencius VA.l. Xin, or You 
Xin, was the name of an ancient kingdom. 

5. Fu Yue ... Three Dukes: Fu Yie was, according to tradition, found by Wu Ding 
(reigned 1324-1265 BCE) while repairing roads; see the Documents (LCC, vol. 
3, pp. 248-53). Hucker begins his extensive entry on the San Gong (Three 
Dukes): ‘From antiquity a collective reference to dignitaries who were officially 
considered the three paramount aides to the ruler and held the highest possible 
ranks in the officialdom ... ’ (Dictionary of Official Titles in Imperial China, 

4871, p.399). 

6. Bo Gun ... love him: There is some uncertainty about the people and places: Bo 
Gun is possibly the son of the Emperor Zhuanxu and the father of Yi, at least 
according to the Shiji 2 (vol. 1, pp. 49-50). Another possibility is the emperor 
in question was Shun. 

7. Yu, Ji and Gao Yao: Respectively, the first emperor of the Xia Dynasty; (or Hou 
Ji) director of husbandry under the Emperor Yao; an officer of justice, also 
under Yao. 

8. the Miao people: A minority people and the ancestors of today’s Hmong people; 
see also 12.8 and 19.5 (and note) and see the Documents (LCC, vol. 3, p. 64). 


10. Exalting Worthiness III 


1. “The king ... fitting See the Documents, ‘The Punishments of Lii’ (LCC, vol. 
3, pp. 601-2). 

2. Shu Nian : See note 2 to chapter 9. 

11. Exalting Unity I 

1. Shang Tong: There is agpin debate about the reading of the title. Many 
commentators read shang in the sense of ‘above’ or ‘superior’, but I translate it 
as in chapters 8-10 (see note 1 to chapter 8) and tong as yitong (one, unity). It 
would seem to be unity or uniformity of beliefs and principles that is the issue 
here. 

2. selected ... Heaven: Who does the selecting is not clear from the text; perhaps 
Heaven is to be taken as the agent. 

3. five punishments: These varied in different eras but at this time were branding 
(mo), cutting off the nose (yi), cutting off the feet (fei), castration (gong) and 
death (da pi). 

12. Exalting Unity II 

1. “The Miao people ... laws ”: The text of the Documents: ‘Among the people of 
Miao, they did not use the power of good, but the restraint of punishments. 
They made the five punishments engines of oppression, calling them the laws’ 
(LCC, vol. 3, p. 591). 

2. the Shu Ling: Either a lost work, possibly a lost chapter of the Documents, or a 
reference to an extant chapter of the YueMing, which has a somewhat similar 
passagg: see LCC, vol. 3, p. 256. 

3. the “Xiang Nian ”: Several commentators suggest that the title should be ‘Ju 
Nian’ as in 9.6 (and see note 2). 


13. Exalting Unity III 


1. the sage kings ... aides and assistants : Other versions have this as a reference to 
both assistants at court and those in far places. 


14. Universal Love I 

1. Jian Ai: See Note on the Translation for an exp lanation of its meaning. 

2. disadvantages: In this chapter, the distinction is between kui and li rather than 
the more usual Mohist distinction between hai and li. I have rendered kui as 
‘disadvantage’, reserving ‘harm’ for hai. 


16. Universal Love IE 

1. “The King’s path ... looks at”\ A combination of lines from the ‘Hong Fan’ 
chapter of the Documents (LCC, vol. 3, p. 331) and the ‘Da Dong’ ode in the 
Odes (Mao 203, LCC, vol. 4, p. 353). 

2. “Greater Elegies ” ... a plum : These elegies are in the ‘Da Ya’, quoted from the 
Odes (Mao 256, LCC, vol. 4, p. 514), verses 6, 8. 


17. Condemning Offensive Warfare I 

1. In ancient times ... warfare: This opening statement, prefaced by shi gu, is more 
commonly found in Mozi 18.5. 


18. Condemning Offensive Warfare II 

1. Jing and Wu : Jing was Chu, and Wu should read Yue because the former was 
already lost by Master Mo’s time. 

2. Ju: A small Warring States period kingdom occupy ing part of what is now 
Shandong province. 

3. Chen and Cai ... Zu: The first two were small Warring States period kingdoms 
situated in what is now Henan province, corresponding to Huaiyangand to 


Xincai, respectively, and were destroyed by Chu in 479 BCE and 447 BCE. The 
kingdom of Zu is referred to in the Spring and Autumn Annals for the 10th year 
of Duke Xiang (see LCC, vol. 5, p. 442 and the note on the question of the 
name (Zu/Cha) on p. 445). 

4. Helii: An ancient King of Wu, he was succeeded by his son Fu Chai (see note 6). 
For an account of the battle with Chu, see the Zuo Zhuan for the 4th year of 
Duke Ding (LCC, vol. 5, p. 751). 

5. Zhulin ... Boju: Zhulin is unknown; Mingai or Ming Pass is mentioned in the 
Zuo Zhuan reference (see note 4) and was situated in what is now Henan; Boju, 
in ancient times in Chu, was in what is now Hubei. 

6. Fu Chai... Ailing : After Fu Chai came to power in 495 BCE, he waged 
successful campaigns against both Qi and Yue, but was later badly defeated by 
Gou Jian of Yue and eventually took his own life. Wen refers to Wen Waters in 
what is now Shandong; Ailing was also in present-day Shandong. 

7. six generals ... Zhi Bo: Han Kangzi, Zhao Xiangzi, Wei Huanzi, Fan Jishe, 
Zhonghang Wenzi and Zhi Bo himself (see also Mozi 49.2). 

8. ‘If a fish ... land’: Not in the extant Odes. 

9. “The noble man ... fortune": There are several similar but not identical 
statements in other texts. 

19. Condemning Offensive Warfare III 

1. You Miao: With San M iao ( Mozi 19.5), these were ancient terms for the M iao 
minority: see the Documents, ‘The Plan of Mi’ (LCC, vol. 3, p. 64). 

2. Xuan Palace: There are several proposed modifications to overcome the 
apparent historical inconsistencies in this statement. 

3. [Zhu] Rong: An ancient god of fire. 

4. Tai Dian ... strange yellow beast: Tai Dian was a notable minister under King 
Wen: see, e.g., the Documents (LCC, vol. 3, pp. 474-86, particularly p. 481). 
The yellow beast, cheng-huang, was a form of supernatural animal. 

5. Xiong Li of Chu ... Lii Shang: In M aster M o’s time the four kingdoms of Chu 
(Jing), Yie, Qi and Jin were pre-eminent, and traditionally, as Master Mo says, 
in the early days (e.g at the time of Yi) there were ten thousand kingdoms and 


at the time of Tang, more than three thousand. Xiong Li of Chu served King 
Wen (Shiji 40 (vol. 5, p. 1691)). Yi Kui was indeed a Yie king, but little else is 
known about him. Tang Shu (Tang Shuyu) was a son of King Wu (Shiji 39 (vol. 
5, pp. 1635-6)). Lii Shangwas also known as Grand Duke Wang of Lii (Shiji 32 
(vol. 5, pp. 1477-9)). 


21. Moderation in Use II 

1. Jiaozhi... Youdu: Jiaozhi is a general reference to the region south of Wuling; 
Youdu (You Zhou) was one of the twelve regions (zhou) in ancient times, 
situated in what is now the northern part of Hebei. 

25. Moderation in Funerals III 

1. Mount Qiong: This mountain is situated in what is now Puxian in Shandong. 

2. Nanji: Unlocated; traditionally, it is said that Shun was buried at Jiuyi Mountain 
in the Ningyuan district of Hunan. 

3. Guiji Mountain : This was situated in what is now Zhejiang province. 

4. Kaimu: Little is known of this place other than that it was an ancient state east 
of Wie. 

5. Yiqu people : The name of a tribe from the western frontiers in ancient times. 

26. Heaven’s Intention I 

1. calamity : Modem commentators point out that sui means misfortune or 
calamity brought about by the spirits. 

2. Heaven ... understands them : I have followed modem Chinese editors and 
commentators in my translation of this statement. Another view is that the 
meaning is that Heaven enlightens the people. 


27. Heaven’s Intention II 


1. “Glorious ... below”: This may be a reference to the Odes ( ShiJing , ‘ Xiao Ya ’; 
Mao 207, LCC, vol. 4, p. 363), although the text is somewhat different. 

2. The Lord ... the Lord: From the Odes {ShiJing, ‘Da Ya’; Mao 241, verse 7, 

LCC, vol. 4, p. 454). 

3. “Zhou was ... spirits ”: Something similar appears in the Documents {Shu Jing, 
‘Tai Shi’; LCC, vol. 3, pp. 285-6). 

31. Percipient Ghosts III 

1. Percipient Ghosts: There is some question about the best translation of the title. 
The usual rendering is ‘Understanding Ghosts’ (in the sense of making clear 
their existence), which certainly fits with the use of ming in the early sections. 
However, from 32.16 on, it is the ghosts {gui) and spirits that are ming , which I 
have rendered ‘percipient’ in this title, although ‘all-seeing’ might also be 
satisfactory. The key point is that ghosts and spirits are aware of human 
activities and are able to respond in appropriate ways. 

2. Earl of Du ... of Zhou: Little is known of the Earl of Du (Du Bo); the place of 
his enfeoffment is thought to have been near Changan in Shanxi province. See 
the Guoyu, ‘Zhou Yi Shang’ (SBCK, vol. 14). KingXuan ruled 827-782 BCE. 

3. Gou Mang: Probably the name of a spirit of spring, traditionally described as 
having the body of a bird and the face of a person. 

4. DukeJian ... Zhuang Ziyi: Duke Jian ruled Yan 504-493 BCE. Little is known 
of Zhuang Ziyi; there are several possible variations in his name. 

5. Yan had Zu ... to watch: The final part of this sentence (after ‘for Zu’) may be a 
later interpolation. 

6. Prince Zhuang ... Zhongli Jiao: Probably Duke Zhuang. There is some doubt 
about the names of the two litigants. 

7. butted him ... stumbled and fell: There are different versions of what exactly 
happened related to readings of tiao shen. Some English translators have the ram 
continuing its post-mortem attack. Chinese commentators either assume the 
appearance of a wizard or read tiao as jue (to stumble and fall), as I have done. 

8. nature and size: The four items - gui, bi, cong and huang - differed in size, 
shape, composition and significance. 


9. King Wen ... unceasingly. From the Odes (‘Da Ya’, Mao 235, LCC, vol. 4, pp. 
427-8). 

10. “Ah alas ... protected”: This passage doesn’t appear in extant writings, although 
there is something similar in the Documents , ‘The Instructions of Yi’ (LCC, vol. 
3, pp. 193-4). 

11. Gan: A place in Hu, a kingdom in Xia times, which occupied part of what is 
now Shanxi. The quotation is from the Documents , ‘The Speech at Gan’ (LCC, 
vol. 3, pp. 152-5), although there are substantial textual variations. 

12. Five Constant Virtues ... Three Paths: The first are the ‘Five Phases’ ( wu xing ), 
which doesn’t here refer to the usual ‘phases’ (metal, wood, water, fire and 
earth), but to ren (love, kindness, humaneness and benevolence), >7 (right action, 
righteousness and justice), li (propriety, rites and ceremonies), zhi (knowledge, 
wisdom) and xin (trustworthiness, good faith), more commonly known as the 
Five Constants (wu chang). The Three Paths are the Way of Heaven, the Way 
of Earth and the Way of mankind. 

13. [So there ... above]: Most editors consider this sentence to be misplaced here. 
Many commentators have regarded the sentence in square brackets in 31.16 as 
incomprehensible; the translation is based on a reconstructed version. 

14. Tui K andDaXi: Ministers to Jie; they are also mentioned in the Lil Shi 
Chunqiu (The Spring and Autumn Annals ofLii Buwei) account. 

15. Qin Ai: Most modem Chinese commentators think this is a book or chapter of a 
book; others take it to be a person. 

32. Condemning Music I 

1. grass- and grain-fed animals: Cattle and sheep, and pigs and dogs, respectively. 

2. “Where will we ... things ”: Previous English translators put this question in the 
mouths of ‘the people’, but this is not how it is understood by Chinese 
commentators. 

3. But let... moment: The translation ofyz (thought, intention, idea) as yi (restrain, 
keep back), as in similar sentence structures elsewhere. 

4. ‘OfficialPunishments ’... doubled: There are several issues with this apparent 
quotation. While most of the first sentence is found in the Documents (Shu Jing, 


‘Yi Xun’; LCC, vol. 3, p. 196), there is no chapter or work entitled ‘Official 
Punishments’ (‘Guan Xing’); most Chinese commentators refer to the Zuo 
Zhuan for the 6th year of Duke Zhao, where there is a letter from Shu Xiang to 
Zi Chan which has something similar (see LCC, vol. 5, p. 607). No one can 
make any sense of the final five characters, and I have omitted them. 

5. ‘Great Oath ’... destroyed: The issues with this quotation include a proposed 
emendation of Naiyanyue (It then goes on to say) to Tai shiyue (‘The Great 
Oath’ says), which I have accepted. In the first sentence there are some 
resemblances to th qD ocuments (ShuJing , ‘Yi Xun’; LCC, vol. 3, p. 198), and a 
close correspondence to the Odes (ShiJing , ‘Lu Song’; Mao 300, LCC, vol. 4, 
p. 625). The rest of the quotation appears in a very similar form in an appendix 
to the ‘Great Oath’ (see LCC, vol. 3, p. 299). 

6. ‘Wu Guan’... rule: There are several issues with this apparent quotation. ‘Wu 
Guan’ is believed to be the title of a no longer extant writing, it probably refers 
to a son of Qi, the second emperor of the Xia Dynasty, \hrious reworkings are 
required in the quotation; see the Odes (ShiJing , ‘Zhou Song’; Mao 274, LCC, 
vol. 4, p. 579). 


35. Against Fate I 

1. “I have heard ... forces ”: There are issues in this apparent quotation. While 
‘The Announcement of Zhong Hui’ is a chapter of the Documents , the 
statement is somewhat different: see LCC, vol. 3, p. 179. Zhong Hui was a 
minister serving Tang the Xia man is Jie. I have followed some Chinese 
commentators in making the penultimate clause accord with the quotation in 
Mozi 36.6 and 37.5 (with some differences with ‘The Great Oath’ quotation in 
36.6). 


36. Against Fate II 


1. “I have heard ...forces ”: See note 1 to Mozi 35. 


2. “[There should ... ourselves There is uncertainty about this quotation and its 
attribution. The ‘two of us’ are thought to be Duke Shao himself and Zhou 
Gong Dan (Duke of Zhou) who acted as regents for the young King Cheng. 


39. Against the Confucians II 

1. ‘In treating ... gradations Quotation from the ‘Zhongy ong’ (‘Using the 
Centre’) chapter of the Book of Rites {Li Ji) - see Doctrine of the Mean XX.5 
(LCC, vol. 1, p. 406), with one minor difference. 

2. ‘Mourning ... months This does not appear to be an exact quotation, and there 
are doubts about the text of the second phrase. The reference may be to the Yi Li 
(‘SangFu’; SSJZS, pp. 347ff.). 

3. Isay. It is not specified who is making the response. I have interpreted it to be 
Master Mo himself, but it could also be an unidentified Mohist or Mohists as a 
whole. 

4. He restrains ... speak out This seems to be a further description of the ‘bell¬ 
like’ person. 

5. Duke Jing of Qi... Yan Zi: Duke Jing is said to have ruled Qi 546-489 BCE. 
There are several references to exchanges with Confucius recorded in the 
Analects (Lunyu) - e.g XII. 11, XVI. 12 and XVIII.3. Yan Zi is Yan Ymg(d. 493 
BCE), chief minister of Qi under Duke Jing and the putative author of the Yanzi 
Chunqiu (SBCK, vol. 14), which several later commentators have interpreted as 
a Mohist work. In keeping with this, he was noted for his fru^lity. 

6. Confucius went to Jing ... was killed : Documented in the Zuo Zhuan for the 16th 
year of Duke Ai (LCC, vol. 5, pp. 843-8). Jing is the state of Chu. Duke Bo 
(Bo Gong) is Bo Sheng The year is 479 BCE, the year of Confucius’ death, but 
it was some years after the deaths of both Duke Jing and Yan Ymg (see note 5 
above). 

7. Nixi: It is not clear where this was; the Yanzi Chunqiu {Yan Zi’s Spring and 
Autumn Annals) version has Erji. 

8. Chiyi Zipi... hundreds of thousands'. Chiy i Zipi was Fan Li who helped Gou 
Jian in the overthrow of Wu. Tian Chang was a Qi noble who drove Duke Jian 
(Jian Gong) from the throne in 481 BCE (see the Shiji 33 (vol. 5, p. 1545)). It is 


unclear who Nanguo Huizi was: he may have been Huizi of the South City and 
a follower of Tian Chang. Zigong was the well-known disciple of Confucius, 
also called Ci (see the Shiji, ibid.). Gao, Guo, Bao and Yan are thought to be four 
separate people by modem Chinese editors; for Gao and Guo, see Zuo Zhuan, 
16th year of Duke Cheng and the Shiji 40 (vol. 5, p. 1710 and p. 1712, note 18); 
Bao is Bao Shuya and Yan is probably Yan Ymg himself. It must be remembered 
that there is no historical evidence to support the Mozi account. 

9. minister of justice in Lu ... for him: Confucius is recorded as having been 
minister of justice in Lu in the 9th year of Duke Ting. Ji Sun (or Jisun) may be 
the person referred to in the Analects - see, e.g., III. 1 - but the events recorded 
here do not appear in any other classical texts. See the Zuo Zhuan , Duke Ding, 
9th year (LCC, vol. 5, pp. 771—3) and the Shiji 47 (vol. 6, pp. 914ff.). 

10. mat... properly : For these two requirements of proper behaviour, see the 
Analects X.9 and X.8(3), respectively. 

11. Shun saw ... dwelling: Tradition has it that Shun’s father Gu Sou took a second 
wife after which both treated Shun badly, but he continued to display proper 
conduct towards them. See also Mozi 46.13. 

12 . Zigong ... Wei: Zigong is generally thought to be Ziggo. KongKui may be 

identified with Kong Li, named in the translation of the Zuo Zhuan where this 
incident is described (Duke Ai, 15th year (LCC, vol. 5, pp. 840-43)). 

13 .YangHuo ... Zhongmou: YangHuo (Yang Hu), charioteer, who was the chief of 
one of the three great families of Lu, rebelled against his master, Ji Huan (Zuo 
Zhuan, Duke Ding, 9th year (LCC, vol. 5, pp. 771-3)). Fu Xi was a high official 
in the Jin city of Zhongmou (in what is now Henan province). While resisting 
attack by Jian Zi of Zhao, he is said to have called for Confucius (Shiji 47, vol. 

6, p. 1924). 

14 .Qidiao ... death: Either Qidiao Kai or Qidiao Duo, both from Lu, said to have 
been disciples of Confucius; both are mentioned in the Shiji 67 (vol. 7, pp. 2213 
and 2220). There is also some variation in interpretation of this text as to 
whether they inflicted or suffered punishment and destruction. 


PART IV 


The Dialogues 

46. Geng Zhu 

1. Geng Zhuzi : Nothing is known of him; he may have been one of M aster M o’s 
disciples. Others in this chapter are Guan Qian’ao and Gao Shizi (46.13) and 
Luo Guli (46.21); see also note 4. 

2. Wu Mazi: M ay be Wu M aqi, a discip le of Confucius, or one of his descendants. 

3. Xia king ... Wengnan Yi: Mi’s son Qi (traditional dates: r. 2197-2188 BCE), the 
name being changed from Qi to Kai due to a Han taboo. Fei Lian was a minister 
in his service. Kun Wu is a mountain in what is now Henan province. There is 
some doubt about the correct name for Wengpan Yi; he was a diviner in the 
service of the Xia ruler. 

4. Zhi Tuyu and Xian Zishuo: Assumed to have been disciples of Master Mo, but 
nothing is known of them, although a Xian Zishi in the Lii Shi Chunqiu (The 
Spring and Autumn Annals of Lii Buwei) 4/3.2 is a student of Master Mo. 

5. follower ofZixia : Bu Shang, one of the most renowned of the Confucian 
disciples - see, e.g, Analects 1.7. 

6. He Shi’s jade, Marquis Sui’s pearl : See Hanfeizi 4 and Huainanzi 6, respectively. 

7. Zi Gao: A great officer of Chu in the Spring and Autumn period. A similar 
exchange is in the Analects XIII. 16. 

8. Prince Wen ofLuyang: See note 6 to chapter 49. 

9. Duke Dan ... opposed Guan Shu: Probably Guan Shu, the third son of King 
Wen and younger brother of King Wu, while Dan, the renowned Duke of Zhou, 
was the fourth son of King Wen. Guan Shu led an uprising to seize the 
succession after the death of King Wu, but was defeated by Dan. See also note 5 
to chapter 48. 

10. the Three Dukes: See note 5 to chapter 9. 

11. Master Qin: Qin Guli, one of Master Mo’s foremost disciples; he also appears 
in Mozi 50, 52, 53 and 56. He is also referred to in Zhuangzi 33 and the Lii Shi 
Chunqiu 2/4.3. 

12. Gongmeng Zi: See note 1 to chapter 48. 


13. Jisun Shao andMeng Bochang: Nothing significant is known about them, but 
they may be descendants of Ji Kangzi and Meng Wubo, respectively, and 
contemporaries of Master Mo. 


47. Valuing Yi 

1. Yi Yin : A renowned minister of state under Tang who, according to tradition, was 
summoned five times before he agreed to serve. 

2. Xian Tangzi... Gongshang Guo: Little is known about them; both are likely to 
have been disciples of Master Mo. Gongshang Guo also appears in Mozi 49.14, 
and there is also record of an exchange between him and Master Mo in the Lii 
Shi Chunqiu ( The Spring and Autumn Annals of Lii Buwei) 19/2.3. 

3. “Principles ... way”: This may be a reference to the Changes (Yijing ) (SSJZS, 
vol. l,p. 149). 

4. Gongliang Huanzi: Regarded as a great officer of Wei by all commentators, but 
there is no biographical information about him. 

5. Merchants ... trading: A problematic sentence translated with reference to the 
Mencius IIIA.4(18). 

6. Zi Waters: These were in what is now Shandong, and the north and south 
directions are in relation to them. 

48. Gongmeng 

1. Gongmeng Zi: There is some uncertainty as to who Gongmeng (taken as a 
double surname) was - possibly GongMingyi. What is agreed is that he was a 
Confucian and may have been a disciple of Zengzi. 

2. three circumstances: These refer to the second part of the preceding phrase, i.e. 
‘not striking so not sounding’. The other two are ‘although not striking yet 
necessarily sounding’ and ‘strikingyet not sounding’. 

3. DukeHuan of Qi... Gou Jian: Duke Huan of Qi (ruled 685-643 BCE), also 
known as Xiao Bo, was, with the assistance of his renowned minister Guan 
Zhong, an effective ruler of his country, at least until his final years. Duke Wen 


of Jin (ruled 636-628 BCE), also known as Chong’er, survived an attempt on 
his life instigated by his father’s concubine in 654 BCE and subsequently 
returned to become a powerful and effective ruler. KingZhuangof Chu (ruled 
613-591 BCE) was one of the Five Lords-Protector: see the Lii Shi Chunqiu 
2/4.2. King Gou Jian of Yue (ruled c. 496-465 BCE) was defeated in battle by 
the Wu army under Fu Chai, having attacked that state, but subsequently was 
victorious and returned to become an effective ruler. 

4. Zhou ... Viscount Wei : Zhou, the last ruler of the Shang/Yin Dynasty, was 
notorious for his cruelty and depravity. Fei Gong was his chief minister. 
Viscount Ji, a leading noble at the time and one of Zhou’s uncles, was 
imprisoned for protesting against Zhou’s excesses. Viscount Wei was also a 
relative of Zhou and opposed his conduct, going into voluntary exile. 

5. Dan ... Guan Shu: The Duke of Zhou, Dan, the fourth son of King Wen and 
counsellor to King Wu, was renowned for his wisdom and rectitude. Guan Shu 
is probably Guan Shu Xian, the third son of King Wen, who was enfeoffed with 
Xian in 1122 BCE and who plotted (unsuccessfully, due to the Duke of Zhou) 
to seize the throne on the death of King Wu. 

6. Zhou ... Xia: The Zhou Dynasty 1122-255 BCE, the Xia 2205-1766 BCE. 

7. Odes ... music: Some commentators think that odes (shi), history (shu), rites (li) 
and music (yue ) all to refer to books, i.e. the relevant classics. Others think that 
only the first two refer to books, while the third and fourth refer to practices. I 
have followed the latter. 

8. “teeth ”: M ay refer to marks on a wooden tally. 

9. There is being yi ... bad fortune: This terse statement needs clarifying: people 
can certainly be right acting, righteous and just (yi) or not, but their being 
fortunate or not does not depend on their being yi or not, rather on the spirits’ 
and gods’ response. 

10. Ziyi: The majority of modem commentators read this chapter title as Ji Zi 
(Viscount Ji) from a lost part of the Documents (Shu Jing), but I have followed 
Wu Yujiang (Mozi Jiaozhu, vol. 2, p. 718, note 57). 

11 .the three hundred odes: The 305 poems of the Book of Songs or Odes (Shi Jing). 

12. were empty: The translation of this statement follows a similar passage in 
Zhuangzi 4. 


13. three months ... three months: Ri (days) in the original is emended to yue 
(months), based on the comment in Hanfeizi 1 on Master Mo’s views. Three 
days does seem unlikely! 

14. child’s ... parents: The reading of this sentence depends on the addition of zi 
(child) after wu (my). 

15. Music is made for its own sake: The opening sentence of Xunzi 20 exemplifies a 
Confucian play on words - the two meanings of the one character, pronounced 
yue as music and le as joy or happiness - deliberately overlooked by the Mohist 
writer of the present passage. So it could read ‘Music is made for pleasure.’ (I 
am indebted to the anonymous reader who drew my attention to this point.) 

16. Cheng Zi: Cheng Fan: see Mozi 7 (and note 1 to chapter 7). 

17. Yu ... Jie and Zhou: Yu was the founder of the Xia Dynasty; Jie and Zhou were 
the paradigmatic evil rulers responsible for the downfall of the Xia and Yin 
dynasties, respectively. 

18. greater than you: It is not specified in what aspect the difference lies, perhaps 
worthiness ( xian ). 

19. Die Bi: Said to have been a disciple of Master Mo, but nothing else seems to be 
known about him. (There is some doubt about the first character of his name.) 

20. Gao Zi: Not the person of the same name in the Mencius VI. 

49. Lu’s Questions 

1. ruler ofLu: Probably Duke M u. 

2. Xiang Ziniu: Said to have been a Qi general under Tian He (see also Mozi 49.19); 
he may be the Niuzi in the Huainanzi 18. 

3. King ofWu ... killed: Refers to Fu Chai’s attack on the Yue forces under Gou 
Jian, who then surrounded Fu Chai at Guiji. Fu Chai’s father Helii attacked Chu; 
Sui was a small state adjacent to Chu. Fu Chai also attacked Qi. Guo Zi is 
probably Guo Shu, a Qi general: see the Spring and Autumn Annals for the 11th 
year of Duke Ai. Fu Chai was defeated by Gou Jian and eventually committed 
suicide. For the defeat of the Jin general Zhi Bo, see also Mozi 18.5 (and notes 4 
and 6 to chapter 18). 

4. San Jin: Refers to the houses (and later the states) of Zhao, Han and Wei. 


5. King of Qi : This is thought to refer to Tian He who seized power in Qi in 404 
BCE and took the title of Tai Wang. 

6. Prince Wen ofLuyang : Luyang was a place name in what is now Henan 
province. Luyang Wen Jun may be Luyang Wen Zi, a descendant of King Ping 
of Chu and the son of Sima Ziqi, or, possibly, he is Gonggun Kuan, who was 
enfeoffed with territory on the southern side of Lu Mountain. See also Mozi 
46.11. 

7. Qiao ... cannibalism occurs : See also Mozi 25.14 (and note 4 to chapter 25), 
which may be the same tribe, although the description of the practice is 
somewhat different. 

8. Gongshang Guo: A disciple of M aster M o; another version of this anecdote is 
in the Lu Shi Chunqiu 19/2.3. The ‘Yue king’ is probably Gou Jian after he had 
defeated Wu. 

9. Wei Yue: Thought to have been one of Master Mo’s disciples. Other probable 
followers in this chapter are Cao Gongzi (49.15), Master Peng Qingsheng 
(49.17), Meng Shan (49.18) and ShengChuo (49.19). Nothing is known about 
any of them. See also notes 8 and 13. 

10 .fundamental ... “condemning aggression ”: In the five situations, Master Mo 
refers in pairs to the 10 groups of chapters detailing the core doctrines (Part II). 

11. lungs: Presumably refers to this part of the animal being used in sacrifices, as 
described in the Yi Li ( The Book of Etiquette and Rites - one of the three ancient 
classics on li). 

12. King ZiLii ... Bo Gong’s insurrection: Zi Lii was a son of King Ping of Chu, and 
Bo Gong was another of his descendants. The ‘family members’ were Zi Lii’s 
older brothers, who were killed by Bo Gong. The events in 480 BCE are 
recorded in the Zuo Zhuan for the 16th year of Duke Ai. 

13. Gao Sunzi ... be withdrawn: Another disciple of Master Mo. His mission was 
to bring Sheng Chuo back. 

14. Gongshu Zi: Gongshu Pan/Ban is featured in Mozi 50 (and see note 1 to chapter 
50). 


50. Gongshu 


1. Gongshu Pan : This is presumably the same man as Gongshu Ban or Gongshu 
Zi (see 49.20 and 21), who is referred to in other texts, e.g., Mencius I\i\.l(l) 
where he is described as a . celebrated mechanist of Lu, of the times of 
Confucius’ and ‘the tutelary spirit of carpenters’. He may have been the son of 
Duke Zhao of Lu. See also 56.1 and comment. 

2. Ying\ The capital of Chu. 

3. to the King : The protagonists may have been King Hui of Chu and Duke Zhao 
of Song 


Further Reading 


TRANSLATIONS 

Graham, Angus C., Later Mohist Logic, Ethics and Science 
(Hong Kong: Chinese University Press, 1978). A 
translation and detailed study of the Dialectical chapters 
(Part HI). 

Ivanhoe, Philip J., Mozi, in Readings in Classical Chinese 
Philosophy, ed. Bryan H. Van Norden and Philip J. 
Ivanhoe (New York: Seven Bridges Press, 2001), pp. 55- 
110. A translation of some of the Core Doctrines 
chapters (Part II). 

Johnston, Ian, The Mozi: A Complete Translation (Hong 
Kong: Chinese University Press, 2010). Acomplete 
translation in bilingual format with detailed annotations. 

Mei, Yipao, The Ethical and Political Works ofMotse 
(London: Probsthain, 1929). Acomplete translation of 
the Epitomes, Core Doctrines and Dialogue chapters 
(Parts I, II and IV) with brief footnotes. 


Watson, Burton, Mo Tzu. Basic Writings (New York: 

Columbia University Press, 1963). Atranslation of many 
of the Core Doctrines chapters (Part II) with brief 
footnotes. 


SPECIALIST STUDIES 

Ahern, Dennis M., ‘Is Mo Tzu a Utilitarian?’, Chinese 
Studies in Philosophy, 3 (1976), pp. 185-94. 

Chong, Chaehyun, ‘Moism: Despotic or Democratic?’, 
Journal of Chinese Philosophy, 35 (2008), pp. 511-22. 

Defoort, Carine, ‘Caring for Whom? Moral Discussions 
between Early Confiicians and Mohists’, Tijdschrift voor 
Filosofie, 57 (1995), pp. 36-50. 

Duda, Kristopher, ‘Reconsidering Mo Tzu on the 

Foundalions of Morality’, Asian Philosophy, 11 (2001), 
pp. 23-31. 

Fraser, Chris, ‘Moism and Self-Interest’, Journal of 
Chinese Philosophy, 35 (2008), pp. 437-54. 

Lowe, Scott, Mo Tzu’s Religious Blueprint for a Chinese 
Utopia (Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press, 1992). 

Mei, Yipao, Motse, The Neglected Rival of Confucius 
(London: Probsthain, 1934). 

Perkins, Franklin, ‘Reconsidering the MozV, Journal of 
Chinese Philosophy, 35 (2008), pp. 379-84. 


Williamson, Henry R, Mo Ti, A Chinese Heretic: A Short 
Sketch of his Life and Works (Tsinan, 1927). 

Winance, Eleuthere, ‘AForgotten Chinese Thinker: Mo 
Tzu’, International Philosophical Quarterly, 1 (1961), 
pp. 593-613. 

Yates, Robin D. S., ‘Early Poliorcetics: The Mohists to the 
Sung’, in Science and Civilisation in China, ed. Joseph 
Needham and Robin D. S. Yates, vol. V:6, Military 
Technology: Missiles and Sieges (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1994), section (e), pp. 
241-485. This provides a detailed account of military 
methods and technology in ancient China with particular 
attention to the Defence chapters of the Mozi ; also of 
interest is section (d), pp. 101-240. 

GENERAL STUDIES 

Chan, Wing-tsit, A Source Book in Chinese Philosophy 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1963). A 
comprehensive collection of excerpts from a wide range 
of Chinese philosophers including all those mentioned 
in the present work. 

Fung, Yu-1 an, History of Chinese Philosophy, vols. 1 and 2, 
trans. Derk Bodde (Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 1952, 1953). Still arguably the major English 



reference work for Chinese philosophy up to the Qing 
Dynasty. 

Graham, Angus C., Disputers of the Tao (La Salle, IL: 
Open Court, 1989). 

Hansen, Chad D., A Daoist Theory of Chinese Thought: A 
Philosophical Interpretation (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1992). An interesting general account 
of early Chinese philosophy, particularly with regard to 
Mohism. 

Lai, Karyn L., An Introduction to Chinese Philosophy 
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008). An 
excellent introductory account of early Chinese 
philosophy - clear and concise. 

Schwartz, Benjamin I., The World of Thought in Ancient 
China (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1985). 



Glossary 


ai tv: love, to love; see also jian ai 
bi : that, the other 

bian to debate, discriminate, dispute, distinguish 
bie g|j: different, to differ, to draw a distinction 
bo thin, to diminish 
cai j *: ability 

chi unit of measurement; see Table of Equivalences for 
Weights and Measures 

ci || : : phrase, words, statement, to depart, take leave of 
da * : large, great 

dang 'o’: proper, fitting, to fit the facts 
dao way, path, the Way, to say 
de ^ : virtue, power 

ding Lt3|: ceremonial tripod, utensil used in sacrifices 

fa ;£ : standard, criterion, law 

fen -V,-: portion, part, lot, duty, to separate 


gu 4}7 : reason, cause (the way things inherently are - 
Hansen) 
giii ghost 

hai |-: harm 

a 

hou M: thick, generous, beneficent 
jia y : family, school 

jian ai : universal love, impartial caring 
ju f|J: to raise (e.g. as atopic), holdup, recommend 
junzi j'-: noble man, paradigmatic man (son of a 
nobleman) 

ke/bu ke id]" ffiUJ : possible/not possible, 
admissible/inadmissible 
iei m- class, kind 

li • j l: unit of measurement; see Table of Equivalences for 
Weights and Measures 
li Jl|l: principle, pattern, coherence 
li |||: proper conduct between people, propriety, rites, 
ceremonies 
li # benefit, profit 

ming brightness, to clarify, enlightened 

ming V: name, fame 

ming j'| order, decree, fate, to say 


nei [ v: within, inner, internal 

qi ij ;■: vapour, breath, spirit, vital spirit/energy 

qing ; ± ; : feelings, emotions, circumstances, reality 

ran/bu ran -V>;: so/not so 

ren 1 j man, person, other 

ren (Z : l° ve > kindness, benevolence, humaneness 

shang jgj': a reward, to reward, praise, coimnend 

shen | ||;: spirit 

shi jjd-: this, to affirm 

shi ± : officer, scholar-official, knight errant 
shi : reality, actuality, entity 

shi fei this/not this, right/wrong 

shu |;|i j: method 
ti body, part, substance 

tian 7p: heaven, Heaven 
tong [gj: the same, sameness 
wai : without, outer, external 
wan wu Fpj ' the ten thousand or myriad things, i.e 
things 

wei p ,: to act, do, deem 

wu M: a negative, nothing, non-being 


wu xing 77 • ! : the five phases or elements (wood, metal, 
earth, fire and water) 
xian : worthy, moral, worthiness 
xiao /J\: small, lesser 
xiao h): filial piety 
xin heart, mind, mind-heart 

xi n trustworthy, trustworthiness 

xing form 

xing 7 : nature, i.e. human nature 
yang [j^: male, sunny, bright, south side of a hill 
yi 13: change, easy 
yi 'j'i', : different, difference 
yi 77 : right action, righteousness, duty, justice 
yin |jf|: female, shade, dark, north side of a hill 
yue : d music (also happiness, to be happy-pronounced 
le) ' 

zhen ( 1 ‘: real, true 

zheng JJ7 : to correct, rectify, correct 
zheng j; /: government, to govern 
zhi to govern, to rule, to bring about good order, to 
regulate, to remedy, government 
zhi v| j: to know, understand, knowledge 


zhi knowledge, wisdom 
zhi j' : finger, to point 

zhong l 1 1: the middle, the centre, in the middle, central, to 
make central 

zhong : loyalty, honesty 

ziran y &A: natural, spontaneous, spontaneously so 



THE BEGINNING 


Let the conversation begin... 

Follow the Penguin Twitter.com@penguinukbooks 

Keep up-to-date with all our stories YouTube.com/penguinbooks 

Pin ‘Penguin Books’ to your Pinterest 

Like ‘Penguin Books’ on Facebook.com/penguinbooks 

Find out more about the author and 
discover more stories like this at Penguin.co.uk 


PENGUIN CLASSICS 


Published by the Penguin Group 

Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R ORL, England 
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA 
Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada M4P 2Y3 (a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.) 

Penguin Ireland, 25 St Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin 
Books Ltd) 

Penguin Group (Australia), 707 Collins Street, Melbourne, Victoria 3008, Australia 
(a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 

Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi - 
110 017, India 

Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, Auckland 0632, New Zealand (a 
division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd) 

Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, Block D, Rosebank Office Park, 181 Jan 
Smuts Avenue, Parktown North, Gauteng 2193, South Africa 

Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R ORL, England 
www.penguin.com 

Translation first published in a bilingual edition by The Chinese University Press 
2010 

This revised translation, with additional editorial material, first published in Great 
Britain by Penguin Classics 2013 

Translation copyright © Ian Johnston, 2010 
Editorial material copyright © Ian Johnston, 2013 

Cover: By the Lake (Hubian), 1998, woodcut by Li Yitai (Photograph © Bridgeman 
Art Library) 

All rights reserved 

The moral right of the translator and author of the editorial material has been 
asserted 


Typeset by Jouve (UK), Milton Keynes 
ISBN: 978-0-141-39211-0 



